The Queen being discontented, which Tarlton perceiving, took upon him to delight her with some quaint jest: whereupon he counterfeited a drunkard, and called for beer, which was brought immediately. Her Majesty noting his humor, commanded that he should have no more: for (quoth she) he will play the beast, and so shame himself. Fear not you (quoth Tarlton) for your beer is small enough. Whereat her Majesty laughed heartily, and commanded that he should have enough.
Tarlton having been late at court, and coming homewards through Fleet Street, he espied the Watch, and not knowing how to pass them, he went very fast, thinking by that means to go unexamined: But the Watch men perceiving that he shunned them, stepped to him and commanded him in the Queen’s name to stand. Stand, quoth Tarlton let them stand that can, for I cannot. So falling down, as though he had been drunk, they helped him up, and so let him pass.
Upon a time, Tarlton being among certain ladies at a banquet which was at Greenwich, the Queen then lying there, one of the ladies had her face full of pimples with heat at her stomach, for which cause she refused to drink wine amongst the rest of the ladies; which Tarlton perceiving (for he was there of purpose to jest  amongst them) quoth he, A murren of that face, which makes all the body fare the worse for it. At which the rest of the ladies laughed, and she (blushing for shame) left the banquet,
Certain noblemen and ladies of the court , being eating of oysters one of them seeing Tarlton, called him, and asked him if he loved oysters? No quoth Tarlton for they be ungodly meat, uncharitable meat, and unprofitable meat. Why, quoth the courtiers; They are ungodly, says Tarlton, because they are eaten without grace, uncharitable, because they leave nought but shells: and unprofitable, because they must swim in wine.
One of the company taking the gentleman's part asked Tarlton at what time he thought the Devil to be most busied? When the Pope dies, (quoth he.) Why says the courtier ? Marry answered he) then all the devils are troubled and busied to plague him; for he hath sent many a soul before him thither, that exclaimed  against him.
Her Majesty dining in the Strand at the Lord Treasurer’s, the lords were very desirous  that she would vouchsafe to stay all night: but nothing could persuade with her. Tarlton was in his clown’s apparel being (at dinner) while in the presence with her, to make her merry and hearing the sorrow that the noblemen made, that they could not make her stay: he asked the nobles what they would give him to make her stay? The lords promised him anything, to perform it. Quoth he procure me the Parsonage of Shard. They caused the patent to be drawn presently: he got on a Parson’s gown and a corner cap and standing upon the stairs, where the Queen would descend, he repeated these words: A parson, or no parson? A parson, or no parson? But after she knew his meaning, she not only stayed all night, but the next day willed he should have possession of the Benefice. A madder parson was never: for he threatened to turn the bell metal into lining for his purse: which he did: the parsonage and all, into ready money.
Tarlton seeing in Greenwich two gentlewomen in the garden together, to move mirth comes to them, and enquires thus: gentlewomen, which of you two is the honester? I, says the one, I hope without exceptions: and I quoth the other, since we must speak for ourselves. So then says Tarlton, one of you by your own words is dishonest, one being honester than the other, else you would answer otherwise: but as I found you, I leave you.
A gentlewoman merrily disposed, being crossed by Tarlton, and half angry, said, sirra, a little thing would make me requite you with a cuff. With a cuff, lady, says Tarlton? So would you spell my sorrow forward: but spell my sorrow backward, then cuff me and spare not: When the gentlemen [be] considered of the word, they laughing, made the simple-meaning gentlewoman to blush for shame.
At the dinner in the great chamber where Tarlton jested, the ladies were daring one another: Quoth one, I ever durst do any thing that is honest and honorable. A French crown of that, says Tarlton. Ten pound of that says the lady. Done, says one. Done says another. Tarlton put two pence beneath his lips, and dared her to take it away with her lips. Fie, says she, that is immodesty. What to kiss, says Tarlton? Then immodesty bears a great hand over all: but once in your life say, you have been beaten at your own weapon. Well, sir, says she, you may say anything. Then says Tarlton, remember, I say you dare not, and so my wager is good.
Tarlton being one Sunday at court all day, caused a pair of oars to tend him, who at night called on him to be gone. Tarlton being a’carousing, drunk so long to the watermen, that one of them was bumpsie, and so indeed were all three for the most part: at last they left Greenwich, the tide being at a great low fall, the watermen yet afraid of the cross cables by the Limehouse, very dark and late as it was, landed Tarlton at Cuckold’s Haven, and said, the next day they would give him a reason for it: But Tarlton was fain to go by land to Redriffe on the dirty bank, every step knee-deep: so that coming home, he called one of his boys to help him off with his boots, meaning his stockings, which were dyed of another color. Whereupon one gave him this theme the next day: Tarlton, tell me: for fain would I know, If thou were landed at Cuckold’s Haven or no? Tarlton answered thus: yes, sir, and I take it in no scorn, for many land there yet miss of the horn.
Not long since lived a little swaggerer called Black Davie, who would at sword and buckler fight with any Gentleman or other, for twelve pence: he being hired to draw upon Tarlton, for breaking a jest upon huffing Kate, a punk, as men termed her: one evening, Tarlton coming forth at the Court gate, being at Whitehall, and walking forward the Tilt-yard, this Davie immediately drew upon Tarlton: who on the sudden, though amazed, drew likewise, and enquired the cause: which Davie denied, till they had fought a bout or two. Tarlton courageously got within him, and taking him in his arms, threw him into the Tilt-yard, who falling upon his nose, broke it extremely, that ever after he snuffled in the head; poor Davie lying all that night in the Tilt-yard, expecting the doors to be opened came forth, and at the barber surgeon's told of this bloody combat: and the occasion of it was (quoth he) because Tarlton being in a tavern, in the company of this damnable cockatrice, huffing Kate, called for wine, but she told him, that without he would burn it, she would not drink. No quoth Tarlton, it shall be burnt, for thou can’t burn it without fire. As how sir (quoth she?) Marry thus. Take the cup in thine hand, and I will tell thee. So he filling the cup in her hand, said it was burnt sufficiently in so fiery a place: she perceiving her self to flouted, hired me to be her champion, to revenge her quarrel.How Tarlton answered the watchmen, coming from the court.
Tarlton having played before the Queen till one a clock at midnight, coming homewards, one of them espied him, called him, sirra what art thou? A woman, says Tarlton. Nay, that is a lie, say the watchmen; women have no such beards. Tarlton replied, if I should have said a man, that you know to be true, and would have  bidden me tell you that you know not, therefore I said a  woman, and so I am all woman, having pleased the Queen, being a woman! Well, sirra, says another, I present the Queen. Then I am a woman, indeed, says Tarlton, as well as you, for you have a beard as well as I, and truly Mistress Annis, my busk is not done yet: when will yours? Leave the gibing, fellow, saith the watch, the Queen's will is, that whoever is taken without doors after ten o'clock, shall be committed, and now it is past one.  Commit all such, says Tarlton, for if it be past one o'clock, it will not be ten this eight hours. With that one lifts up his lantern, and looks him in the face, and knew him. Indeed, Master Tarlton you have more wit then all we, for it is true, that ten was before, but now one is before ten. It is true, quoth Tarlton, watchmen had wont to have more wit, but for want of sleep they are turned fools. So Tarlton stole from them and they to seem wise, went home to bed.
There was a young Gentleman in the Court, that had first lain with the mother, and after with the daughter, and having so done, asked Tarlton what it resembled: quoth he as if you would first have eaten the hen, and after the chicken.
There was a nobleman that asked Tarlton what he thought of soldiers in time of peace. Marry (quoth he) they are like chimneys in summer.Tarlton’s jest to an unthrifty courtier.
There was an unthrifty gallant belonging to the court, that had borrowed five pounds of Tarlton: but having lost it at dice, he sent his man to Tarlton to borrow five pounds more, by the same token he owed him already five pounds. Pray tell your master (quoth Tarlton) that if he will send me the token, I will send him the money: for who deceives me once, God forgive him: if twice, God forgive him: but if thrice, God forgive him, but not me, because I could not beware.
Tarlton being in a merry vein, as he walked in the Great Hall in Greenwich, he met my old Lord Chamberlain, going between two fantastic gallants, and cried aloud unto him, my lord, my lord, you go in great danger: whereat amazed, he asked whereof: of drowning (quoth Tarlton) were it not for those two bladders under each of your arms.
To an ordinary in Whitefriars, was a gentleman used, by reason of extraordinary diet. To this, Tarlton often frequented as well continued an acquaintance and to please his appetite. It chanced so upon a time (especially) being set among the gentlemen and gallants they inquired him, why melancholy had got the upper hand of his mirth; to which he said little. But with a  squint eye (as custom had made him hare-eyed) he looked for a jest to make them merry. At last he espied one that sat on his left side, which had a very red face. He being a very great gentleman, (which was all one to Tarlton) presently in great haste called his host. Who do I serve? My host, quoth Tarlton; The Queen's majesty, replied the good man of the house. How does it happen then, quoth Tarlton? That (to her Majesty's disgrace) you dare make me a companion with serving men, clapping my Lord Chandos's cullisance upon my sleeve. Looking at the gentleman with a red face; methinks, quoth he, it fits like the Saracen's Head Without Newgate. The gentleman's salamander's face is burned like Etna with anger.  The rest laughed heartily. In the end (all enraged) the gentleman swore to fight with him at the next meeting.
As Tarlton and the others passed along Fleet Street, he espied a spruce young gallant, with a black complexion, with long hair hanging down over his ears, and a beard of the Italian cut, in white satin, very quaintly cut, and his body so stiffly starched, that he could not bend himself any way for no gold. Tarlton, seeing such a wonder coming, trips before him, and meeting this gallant, took the wall of him, knowing that one so proud, at least looked for the prerogative. The gallant, scorning that a player should take the wall, or so much indignify him, turns himself, and presently drew his rapier. Tarlton drew likewise. The gentlemen fell to it roundly; but Tarlton (in his own defense) compassing and traversing his ground, gaped with a wide mouth, whereat the people laughed: the gentleman pausing, enquired why he gaped so. O, sir, says he, in hope to swallow you; for, by my troth you seem to me like a prune in a mess of white broth. At this the people parted them. The gentleman noting his mad humor, went his way well contented: for he knew not how to amend it.
At the Bull in Bishopsgate Street, where the Queen's Players oftentimes played, Tarlton coming on the stage, one from the gallery threw a pippen at him. Tarlton took up the pip and looking on it, made this sudden jest: pip in, or nose in, choose you whether, put yours in, ere I put in the other. Pippin you have put in: then, for my grace, would I might put your nose in another place.
Tarlton having flouted the fellow for his pippin which he threw, he thought to bemeet with Tarlton at length. So in the play Tarlton's part was to travel, who kneeling down to ask his father blessing, the fellow threw an apple at him, which hit him on the cheek, Tarlton taking up the apple, made this jest. Gentleman, this fellow, with this face of mapple, instead of a pippin, hath thrown me an apple, but as for an apple, he had cast a crab, so instead of an honest woman, God hath sent him a drab. The people laughed heartily, for he had a quean to his wife.
It chanced that in the most of a play, after long expectation for Tarlton, being much desired of the people, at length he came forth: where (at his entrance) one in the gallery pointed his finger at him, saying  to a friend that had never seen him, that is he. Tarlton to make sport  at the least occasion given him, and seeing the man point with the finger, he in love again held up  two fingers: the captious fellow, jealous of his wife (for he was married) and because a player did it, took the matter more heinously, and asked him why he made horns at him, no (quoth Tarlton) they be fingers: for  there is no man, which in love to me, lends me one finger, but he shall have three. No no, says the fellow, you gave me the horns. True says Tarlton) for my fingers are tipped with nails, which are like horns, and I must make a show of that which you are sure of. This matter grew so, that the more he meddled, the more it was for his disgrace. Wherefore the standers by counselled  him to depart, both he and his horns, lest  his cause grew desperate. So the poor fellow, plucking his hat over his eyes, went his ways.
It chanced that one Fancy and Nancy, two musicians in London, used often with their boys to visit Tarlton, when he dwelt in Gracious Street at the Sign of the Saba, a tavern, he being one of their best friends or benefactors, by reason of old acquaintance. To requite which, they came one summer’s morning to play him "The Hunt's Up" with such music as they had. Tarlton, to requite them, would open his chamber door, and for their pains would give them muscadine: which a cony-catcher noting, and seeing Tarlton came forth in his shirt and nightgown to drink with these musicians, the while this nimble fellow stepped in, and took Tarlton’s apparel, which every day he wore, thinking that if he were espied to turn it to a jest. But it past for current and he goes his ways. Not long after Tarlton returned to his chamber, and looked for his clothes, but they were safe enough from him. The next day this was noised abroad, and one in mockage threw him in this theme, he playing then at the Curtain: Tarlton, I will tell thee a jest, which after turned to earnest. One there was, as I heard say, who in his shirt heard music play, while all his clothes were stolen away. Tarlton smiling at this, answered on the sudden thus: that's certain, sir, it is no lie that same one in truth was I, when that the thief shall pine and lack, then shall I have clothes to my back. And I, together with my fellows, may see them ride to Tyburn Gallows.
There was a poor beggar, but a conceited fellow, who seeing Tarlton at his door, asked something of him for God's cause. Tarlton putting his hand in his pocket, gave him two pence instead of a penny, at which Tarlton made this rhyme: of all the beggers most happy thou art, for to thee mine hand is better than my heart. Quoth the begger: true it is, master, as it chance now. The better for me, and the worse for you.
Tarlton, to satisfy the humors of certain gentlemen his familiar acquaintance, went about for to try the skill of a simple doctor of physick that dwelt not far from Islington, and thus it was he took a fair urinal, and filled it half full of good wine, and bore it to this doctor, saying it was a sick man’s water. He viewed it, and tossing it up and down, as though he had great knowledge: quoth he, the patient whose water it is, is full of gross humors, and hath need of purging, and to be let some ten ounces of blood. No you dunce, replied Tarlton, it is good piss, and with that drunk it off, and threw the urinal at his head.
Tarlton passing through London, by chance he heard a simple country fellow in an alehouse, calling for a Kingstone pot of ale, stepped into him, and threatened to accuse him of treason, saying sirra, I have seen and tasted of a penny pot of ale, and have found good of the price but of a Kingstone coin I never heard, therefore it is some counterfeit, and I must know how you came by it: hereupon, the country fellow was driven into such a maze that out of doors he got, and took him to his heels, as though wildfire had followed him.
Tarlton, being merrily disposed, as his wife and he sat together, he said to her, Kate, answer me to one question, without a lie, and take this crown of gold. Which she took on condition, that if she lost, to restore it back again. Quoth Tarlton, am I a cuckold or no, Kate? Whereat she answered not a word, but stood silent, notwithstanding he urged her many ways. Tarlton seeing she would not speak, asked his gold again. Why, quoth she, have I made any lie; no, says Tarlton: why then goodman fool, I have won the wager. Tarlton, mad with anger, made this rhyme: as women in speech can revile a man; so can they in silence beguile a man.
In Carter Lane dwelt a merry cobbler, who being in company with Tarlton, asked him what countryman the Devil was? Quoth Tarlton, a Spaniard: for Spaniards, like the Devil, trouble the whole world.
In time of scarcity, a simple Cheesemonger hearing Tarlton commended for his quick wit, came up to him and asked him why he thought cheese and butter to be so dear? Tarlton answered, because wood and coals are so dear, for butter and cheese a man may eat without a fire.
Tarlton meeting a rich Londoner, fell into talk about the Bishop of Peterborough, highly praising his bounty to his servants, his liberality to strangers, his great hospitality and charity to the poor. He doth well, says the rich man, for what he hath he hath but during his life. Why (quoth Tarlton) for how many lives have you your goods?
As Tarlton and his wife sat at dinner, his wife being displeased with him, and thinking to cross him, she gave away half his meat unto a poor beggar, saying, take this for my other husband’s sake. Whereupon Tarlton took all that was left, and likewise bade the poor fellow to pray for his other wife's soul.
There was a crackrope boy, meeting Tarlton in London Street, sung this rhyme unto Tarlton: woe worthy Tarlton, That ever thon wast borne. Thy wife hath made thee cuckold, and thou must wear the horn. Tarlton presently answered him in extemporie. What and if I be, boy I'm never the worse. She keeps me like a gentleman, with money in my purse.
A jest came in Tarltons head where to dine, and thought he, in all that a man does, let him aim at the fairest, for sure, if I hie myself anywhere this day, it shall be to my Lord Mayor's. And upon this goes to the Counter, and entered his action against my Lord Mayor, who was presently told of it, and sends for him. Tarlton waits dinner time and then comes, who was admitted presently. Master Tarlton (says my Lord Mayor) have you entered an action against me in the Poultry Counter? My lord (says Tarlton) have you entered an action against me in Wood Street Counter? Not I, in truth, says my lord. No (says Tarlton) he was a villain that told me so then. But if it be not so, forgive me this fault, my lord, and I will never offend in the next. But in the end he begins to swear, how he will be revenged on him that mocked him, and flings out in a rage. But my lord said, Stay, Master Tarlton, dine with me, and no doubt but after dinner you will be better minded. I will try that, my lord, says Tarlton, and if it alter mine anger, both mine enemy and I will thank you together for this courtesy.
One that fell out with his friend, meets him in the street, and calling him into a corner, gave him a box on the ear, and felled him, getting him gone, and never told wherefore he did so: which Tarlton beholding, raised up the fellow, and asked him the reason of their sudden falling out. Can you tell, sir, said the fellow, for by my troth as yet I cannot. Well said Tarlton, the more fool you, for had I such feeling of the cause, my wit would remember the injury: but many men are goslings; the more they feel, the less they conceive.
Tarlton meeting two tailors (friends of his) in the evening in mirth cries, who goes there? A man answered: a tailor. How many is there? one? Yea said Tarlton. Two, said the other tailor. Then you say true, said Tarlton, for two tailors go to a man. But before they parted, they foxed Tarlton at the Castle in Paternoster Row, that Tarlton confessed them two tailors to be honest men. So what they spent in the purse, they got in the person, coming but one, by Tarlton's account, they returned two. But Tarlton coming one, returned less by his wit, for that was shrunk in the wetting.
Tarlton and his wife keeping an ordinary in Paternoster Row, were bidden out to supper, and because he was a man noted, she would not go with him in the street, but entreats him to keep one side, and she another, which he consented to. But as he went, he would cry out to her, and say, turn that way, wife. And anon, on this side, wife. So the people flocked the more to laugh at them. But his wife (more than mad angry) goes back again, and almost forswore his company.
When Tarlton dwelt in Gracious Street, at a tavern at the Sign of the Saba, he was chosen scavenger, and often the ward complained of his slackness, in keeping the streets clean. So on a time when the cart came, he asked the raker why he did his business so slackly? Sir (said he) my sore horse was in the fault, who being let blood and drenched yesterday, I durst not labor him. Sir (said Tarlton) your horse shall smart for it, and so leads him to the counter, which the raker laughed at, and (without his horse) did his work with the rest, thinking Tarlton’s humor was but to jest, and would return him his  horse again anon. But when that anon came, he was fain to pay all his fees of the prison, as directly as if he himself had been there. For if Tarlton had committed the master, the business had not gone forward, therefore the horse was in prison for the master.
Tarlton keeping a tavern in Gracious Street, he let it to another, who was indebted to Armin’s master, a goldsmith in Lombard Street, yet he himself had a chamber in the same house. And this Armin (being then a wag) came often thither to demand his master’s money which he sometimes had, and sometimes had not. In the end the man growing poor, told the boy he had no money for his master, and he must bear with him. The man’s name being Charles Armin made this verse, writing it with chalk on a wainscot. O world, why wilt thou lie? Is this Charles the great? that I deny. Indeed Charles the great before, gut now Charles the less, being poor. Tarlton coming into the room, reading it, and partly acquainted with the boy’s humor, coming often thither for his master’s money, took a peace of chalk, and wrote this rhyme by it: A wag thou art, none can prevent thee, and thy desert shall content thee, let me divine. As I am, so in time thou'lt be the same, my adopted son therefore be, To enjoy my clown’s suit after me. And see how it fell out. The boy reading this, so loved Tarlton after, that regarding him with more respect, he hied to his plays, and fell in a league with his humor, and private practice brought him to present playing, and at this hour performs the same, where, at the Globe on the Bankside men may see him.
There was one Banks(in the time of Tarlton) who served the Earl of Essex and had a horse of strange qualities: and being at the Cross Keys in Gracious Street, getting money with him, as he was mightily resorted to; Tarlton then (with his fellows) playing at the Bell by, came into the Cross Keys (amongst many people to see fashions: which Banks perceiving (to make the people laugh) says Signior (to his horse) go fetch me the veriest fool in the company. The jade comes immediately, and with his mouth draws Tarlton forth. Tarlton (with merry words) said nothing but God a mercy, horse. In the end Tarlton seeing the people laugh so, was angry inwardly, and said, sir, had I power of your horse, as you have, I would do more than that. What e'er it be, said Banks (to please him) I will charge him to do it. Then (says Tarlton) charge him to bring me the veriest whore master in this company. He shall (says Banks). Signior, (says he) bring Master Tarlton here the veriest whore master in the company. The horse leads his master to him. Then God a mercy horse indeed, says Tarlton. The people had much to do to keep peace; but Banks and Tarlton had like to have squared, and the horse by to give aim. But ever after it was a by-word through London, God a mercy horse, and is to this day.
At the Bull at Bishopsgate was a play of Henry the Fifth, wherein the judge was to take a box on the ear, and because he was absent that should take the blow, Tarlton himself (ever forward to please) took upon him to play the same judge, besides his own part of the clown. And Knell then playing Henry the Fifth, hit Tarlton a sound box indeed, which made the people laugh the more because it was he, but anon the judge goes in, and immediately Tarlton (in his clown clothes) comes out, and asks the actors what news. O (said one) had you been here, you should have seen Prince Henry hit the judge a terrible box on the ear. What man, said Tarlton, strike a judge? It is true i'faith, said the other. No other like, said Tarlton, and it could not be but terrible to the judge, when the report so terrifies me, that me thinks the blow remains still on my cheek, that it burns again. The people laughed at this mightily: and to this day I have heard it commended for rare, but no marvel, for he had many of these. But I would see our clowns in these days do the like. No I warrant ye, and yet they think well of themselves, too.
A wag-halter boy met Tarlton in the street, and said, Master Tarlton, who lives longest? Marry boy, says Tarlton, he that dies latest. And why die men so fast, said the boy? Because they want breath, said Tarlton. No, rather said the boy, because their time is come: then thy time is come, said Tarlton, see who comes yonder: Who? said the boy? Marry, said Tarlton, Bull the Hangman, or one that would willingly be the hangman. Nay, hang me then, if I employ him at this time, said the boy, Well, said Tarlton, then though will be hanged by thy own confession, and so they parted.
Tarlton keeping an ordinary in Paternoster Row and sitting with gentlemen to make them merry, would approve mustard (standing before them) to have wit. How so says one? It is like a witty scold, meeting another scold, knowing that scold will scold, begins to scold first. So says he, the mustard being licked up, and knowing that you will bite it, begins to bite you first. I’ll try that, says a gull by, and the mustard so tickled him, that his eyes watered. Now now, says Tarlton, does my jest favor? Aye, says the gull, and bite too: if you had had better wit, says Tarlton, you would have bit first, so then conclude with me, that dumb, unfeeling mustard hath more wit that a talking unfeeling fool, as you are. Some were pleased, and some were not, but all Tarlton's care was taken (for his resolution was ever) before he talked any jest.
Tarlton (as other gentlemen used) at the first coming by of tobacco, did take it more for fashion's sake than otherwise, and being in a room, sat between two men overcome with wine, and they never seeing the like, wondered at it, and seeing the vapor come out of Tarlton's nose cried out, fire, fire, and threw a cup of wine in Tarlton's face. Make no more stir, quoth Tarlton, the fire is quenched. If the sheriffs come, it will turn to a fine, as the custom is. And drinking that again, fie, says the other, what a stink it makes. I am almost poisoned. If it offend, says Tarlton, let's everyone take a little of the smell, and to the savor will quickly go, but tobacco whiffs made them leave him to pay all.
In the city of Gloucester, Master Bird of the Chapel met with Tarlton, who joyful to regreet other went to visit his friends: amongst the rest, Master Bird of the Queen's Chapel, visited Master Woodcock of the College, where meeting many friendly speeches past, amongst which, Master Woodcock challenged Master Bird of kin: who mused that he was of his affinity and he never knew it. Yes, says Master Woodcock, every woodcock is a bird, therefore it must needs be so. Lord, sir, says Tarlton, you are wise, for though every woodcock be a bird, yet every bird is not a woodcock. So Master Woodcock like a woodcock bit his lip, and mumbudget was silent.
While the Queen’s players lay in Worcester City to get money, it was his custom for to sing extempore of theams given him: amongst which they were appointed to play the next day: now one fellow of the city amongst the rest, that seemed quaint of conceit, to lead other youths with his fine wit gave out that the next day he would give him a Theam, to put him to a non plus: divers of his friends acquainted with the same expected some rare conceit. Well, the next day came, and my gallant gave him his invention in two lines, which was this: me thinks it is a thing unfit, to see a gridiron turn the spit. The people laughed at this, thinking his wit knew no answer there until, which angered Tarlton exceedingly, and presently with a smile looking about. When they expected wonders, he put it off. I think it is an unfit thing. To see an ass have any way. The people hooted for joy to see the theam-giver dash, who like a dog with his tail between his legs, left the place. Such commendations Tarlton got, he slept with the bailiff that night, where my theamer does not come, although he was sent for so much he vexed at that and looked for the answer.
I remember I was once playing in the country, where as Tarlton's use was, the play being done, everyone was pleased to throw out his theam. Among all of the rest, one was read to this effect, word by word: Tarlton, I am one of thy friends, and not one of thy foes. Then I prithee tell how cam'st by thy flat nose: Had I been there at the time on those banks, I would have laid my short sword over his long shankes Tarlton, mad at this question, because it was his property, sooner to take such a matter ill than well. Very suddenly returned him with his answer: Friend or foe, if thou wilt needs know, mark me well. With parting dogs and bears, then by the ears, this chance fell But what of that? Though my nose be flat, my credit to save yet very well, I can by the smell, scent an honest man from a knave.
When the Queen’s Players were restrained in summer, they travelled down to Saint James his Fair at Bristol, where they were worthily entertained both of Londoners, and those citizens. It happened that a wealthy citizen, called Master Sunbanke, one morning secretly married his maid, but not so secret but it was blown abroad. That morning Tarlton and others walking in the fair to visit his familiar friends of London, and being in company of Bristol men, they did see Master Sunbanke coming, who had his property with his neck, not to stir it any way but to turn body and all. It chanced at the fair end, he stood to piss against a wall, to whom Tarlton came, and clapping him on the shoulder, God give you joy of your marriage, says he. M. Sunbanke, being taken pissing against the wall would have looked back to thank him, and suddenly turns about body and all in the view of many, and showed all: which so abashed him that, ashamed, he took into a tavern, protesting that he had rather have spent ten pound. Sure (said the vintner) the fault is in your neck, which will not turn without the bodies assistance, and not in Master Tarlton. Call you him Master Tarlton, says Master Sunbanke? Yea, sir, says the vintner, he is the Queen’s jester. He may be whose jester he will be, but this jest agrees not with me at this time, says Master Sunbanke.
In the country where the Queen’s Players were accepted into a gentleman’s house, the wagon unlading of the apparel, the wagoner comes to Tarlton, and doth desire him to speak to the steward for his horses. I will, says he: and coming to the steward: sir, says Tarlton, where shall our horses spend the time? The gentleman Looking at Tarlton at that question suddenly answered: If it please you, or them, let them walk a turn or two, over there is a fair garden, let them play a game or two at bowls alley, and departs thence about his other business. Tarlton commending the sudden wit of the steward, saith little. But my steward not quiet, tells to the gentlewoman about how he had driven Tarlton to a non plus with a jest, whereas they all did laugh heartily: which a servingman loving Tarlton well, ran and told him as much. Tarlton, to add fuel to the fire, and loathe to rest thus put off with a jest, goes and gets two of the horses into the garden, and turns into the bowling alley, who with their heels made havoc. Being the gentleman’s only pastime, the ladies above from a window, seeing horses in the garden alley, call the knight, who cries out to Tarlton: Fellow, what meanest thou? Nothing, sir, says he, but two of my horses are at seven up, for a peck of provender, a foolish match that I made. Now they being in play at bowls run run your Steward may come after and cry run run at which though they smiled, yet the steward had not thanks for his labor, to set the horses to such an exercise and they could not blame Tarlton, who did but as he was bidden. But by this jest oats and hay, stable room, and all was plenty.
At Salisbury, Tarlton and his fellows were to play before the mayor and his brethren, but one of his company (a young man) was so drunk that he could not. Whereat Tarlton, as mad angry as he was mad drunk, claps me on his legs a huge pair of bolts. The fellow, dead asleep, felt nothing. When all was done. they conveyed him to the jail on a man's back, and entreated the jailer to do God’s good service and let him lie there till he waked. While they were about their sport the fellow waked and finding himself in durance, and the jail hung round with bolts and shackles, he began to bless himself, and thought sure in his drunken self he had done some mischief. With that he called to know, but none came to him. Then he thought verily his fault was capital, and that he was a close prisoner. By and by comes the keeper, and moaned him, that one so young should come so the shameful a death as hanging. Anon another comes, and another with the like, which further put him in a puzzle. But at last comes Tarlton, and others, entreating the keeper, yet if it might be, that they might see their fellow ere they went. But he very hardly was entreated. But at length the poor drunken signor called out for them. In they come. Oh Tom, says Tarlton, hard was thy hap, in drunkenness to murder this honest man, and our hard hap too, to have it reported, any of our company is hanged for it. O God, O God, says the fellow, is my fault so great? then commend me to all my friends. Well short tale to make, the fellow forswore drunkenness, if he could escape, and by as cunning a wile (to his thinking) they got him out of prison by an escape, and sent him to London before, who was not a little glad to be gone. But see how this jest wrought: by little & little the fellow left his excessive drinking, and in time altered his desire of drunkenness.
Tarlton upon a time being in the country and lodging in an homely inn, during which time there was a gentleman dwelling in the same town, somewhat frantic and distraught of his wits, which mad man on a sudden rushed into Tarlton’s bed chamber, with his sword drawn, and finding him there is bed, would have slain him, saying: Villain, were it not valiantly done to strike off thy knave’s head at one blow? Tarlton answered, tut, sir, that's nothing with your worship to do. You can as easily strike off two heads at one blow as one, wherefore, if you please, I’ll go down and call up another, and so you may strike off both our heads at once. The mad man believed him, and so let him slip away.
Tarlton having been domineering very late one night, with two of his friends, and coming homewards along Cheapside, the watch being then set. Master Constable asked, Who goes there? Three merry men quoth Tarlton. That is not sufficient. What are you, quod Master Constable? Why, says Tarlton, one of us is an eye maker, and the other a light maker. What sayest thou, knave, dost mock me? The one is an eye maker, the other a light maker, which two properties belong unto God only: commit these blasphemers, quoth the constable. Nay, I pray you good Master Constable, be good in your office, I will approve what I have said, to be true quod Tarlton. If thou canst says the constable, you shall pass, otherwise you shall be all three punished. Why (quod Tarlton) this fellow is an eye maker, because a spectacle maker; and this other a maker of light, because a chandler, that makes your darkest night as light as your lantern. The constable seeing them so pleasant, was well contented. The rest of the watch men laughed, and Tarlton with his two companions went home quietly.
The Queen's players traveling into the west country to play, and lodging in a little village, some ten miles from Bristol, in which village dwelt a pretty nut brown lass, to whom Tarlton made proffer of marriage, protested that he came from London purposely to marry her. The simple maid being proud to be beloved by such a one whom she knew to be the Queen’s man, without more entreaty, yielded, and being both at the church together, and Master Parson ready to perform his duty, and coming to the words of, I Richard take thee Joan. Nay, stay, good Master Parson, I will go and call my fellows, and come to you again. So going out of the church in haste, he returned at leisure; for, having his horse ready saddled, he rode toward Bristol, and by the way told his fellows of his success with his wench.
It chanced upon a time, as Tarlton went forth with a birding piece into the fields to kill crows, he espied a daw sitting in a tree, at which he meant to shoot; but at the same instant, there came on by, to whom he spoke in this manner: Sir quoth he, yonder I see a daw, which I will shoot at if she sit. If she sit, said the other, then she is a daw indeed. But, quoth Tarlton, if she sit not, what is she then? Marry, quoth the other, a daw also. At which words she immediately flew away. Whereupon Tarlton spoke merrily in a rhyme, as followed: whether a daw sit, or whether a daw fly, whether a daw stand, or whether a daw lie, whether a daw creep, or whether a daw cry, in what case soever a daw persever, a daw is a daw, and a daw shall be ever.
As Tarlton upon a day sat at his own door, to him came a poor old man and begged a penny for the Lord's sake. Whereupon Tarlton having no single money about him, asks the beggar what money he had? No more money, master, but one single penny. Tarlton, being merrily disposed, called for his penny, and having received it, gave it to his boy to fetch a pot of ale. Whereat the beggar grew blank, and began to gather up his wits, how to get it again. The pot of ale, for the beggars penny, being brought, he offered to drink to the beggar. Nay, stay awhile  master, quoth the beggar, the use is, where I was born, that he that pays for the drink, must drink first. Thou sayest well, quoth Tarlton; go to, drink to me then. Whereupon the beggar took the pot, saying, here master, I drink to you, (and therewithal drank off every drop.) Now master, if you will pledge me, send for it as I have done. Tarlton feeling himself so overreached, greatly commended the beggar’s wit, and withall in recompense thereof, gave him a teaster. With that the beggar said, that he would most truly pray to God for him. No, answered Tarlton, I pray thee pray for thyself, for I take no usury for alms deeds.
It was Tarlton's occasion another time to ride into Suffolk, being furnished with a very lean large horse. And by the way, a lusty gallant met him, and in mockage asked him what a yard of his horse was worth? Marry sir, quoth Tarlton, I pray you alight, and lift up my horse’s tail, and they in that shop will tell you the price of a yard.
Upon a time, as Tarlton and his wife, (as passengers) came sailing from Southampton towards London, a mighty storm arose and endangered the ship, whereupon the captain thereof charged every man to throw into the seas the heaviest thing he could best spare, to the end to lighten somewhat the ship. Tarlton that had his wife there, offered to throw her overboard, but the company rescued her; and being asked wherefore he meant so to do he answered: she is the heaviest thing I have, and I can best spare her.
Of late there was a gentleman living in England, that where so ever he dined, would of every dish convey a modicum thereof into his gown sleeve. Which gentleman being upon a time of dinner at a gentleman’s house in the country, there he used his aforesaid quality. In the company of Master Tarlton, who perceiving it, said thus unto the company: My master, I am now determined before you all, to make my last will and testament, and first, I bequeath my soul to God my creator, and my body to be buried in the sleeve of yonder gentleman’s gown, and with that, stepping to him, he turned up the gown sleeve, where out, here dropped a bit, and there a bit, with choice of much other good cheer, still shaking it, saying, I meant this sleeve, gentleman, this sleeve I meant.
Within a while after, as the same gentleman and Tarlton passed through a field together, a crow in a tree cried kaw, kaw, see yonder Tarlton, quoth the gentleman; yonder crow calleth thee knave. No, sir (he answered) he beckons to your worship as the better man.
Tarlton going towards Hogsdon, met a country maid coming to market. Her mare stumbling, down she fell over and over, showing all that ever God sent her, and then rising up again, she turned her round about unto Master Tarlton, and said, Godsbody sir, did you ever see the like before? No, in good sooth, quoth Tarlton, never but once in London.
Upon a time, when the players were put to silence, Tarlton & his boy took so long in the country, that all their money was gone, and being a great way from London, they knew not what to do; but as want is the whetstone of wit, Tarlton gathered his conceits together, and practiced a trick to bear him up to London without money, and this is it. In to an inn in Sandwich they went, and they were there for two nights at great charge, although he had no money to pay for the cost. The third morning he had his man go down and make content himself before his host and his hostess, and mumbling say to himself, Lord, Lord, what a scald master do I serve? This is it to serve such seminary priests and Jesuits: Now even as I am an honest boy, I will leave him in the church, and shift for myself. Here’s ado about penance and mortification, as though (forsooth) Christ hath not died enough for all. The boy mumbled out these instructions so dissembling, that it stroke a jealousy in the inn holder's heart, that out of doubt his master was a seminary's priest; whereupon, he presently sent for the constable, and told him all the foresaid matter, and so went up both together to attach Tarlton in his chamber, who purposely had shut himself inside and betaken him to his knees, and to his crosses, to make the matter seem more suspicious, which they espied through the keyhole, made no more ado, but in they rushed, and arrested him for a seminary's priest, discharged his score, bore his and his boy's charges up to London, and there in hope to have rich rewards, presented him to Master Fleetwood, the old Recorder of London: but now marks the jest. When the recorder saw Tarlton, and knew him well, he entertained him very courteously, and all to befooled the inn holder and his mate, and sent them away with fleas in their ears: but when Tarlton saw himself discharged out of their hand he stood jesting and pointing at their folly, and so taught them by cunning, more wit and thrift against another time.
Upon a time Tarlton was wrongfully accused for getting of a gentleman’s maid with child and for the same, brought before a justice in Kent, which justice said as followeth: It is a marvel (Master Tarlton) that you being a gentleman of good quality, and one of her Majesty's servants, would venture thus to get maids with child. Nay rather (quoth Tartlon) were it marvel if a maid had gotten me with child.
Tarlton travelling to play abroad, was in a town where in the inn was a pretty maid, whose favor was placed in a corner of Tarlton’s affection. And talking with her, she appointed to meet him at the bottom of a pair of stairs. Night and the hour came, and the maid subtly sent down her mistress, whom Tarlton catching in his arms: Art come, wench, says he? But alas, says the mistress, not knowing who it was. Tarlton hearing it was the mistress, start aside, and the maid came down with a candle, and she espied a glimpse of Tarlton in the dark, who stepped into another room. How now, mistress, said the maid. Something (said she) affrighted me, some man sure, for I heard him speak. No, no, mistress, said the maid, it is no man; it was a bull calf that I shut into a room, till John our pounder came to have pounded him for a stray. Had I thought that (saith she) I would have hit him such a knock on his forehead, that his horns should never have graced his coxcomb, and so she departs up again afraid. But how Tarlton took this jest, think you.
In the country Tarlton told his oastess he was a conjurer. O sir (she says) I had pewter stolen off my shelf the other day; help me to it, and I will forgive you all the pots of ale you owe me, which is sixteen dozen. Tarlton says, tomorrow morning the Devil shall help you to it, or I will trounce him. Morning came, and the oastess and he met in a room by themselves. Tarlton to pass the time did exercises of his wit, with circles and tricks falls to conjure, having no more skill than a dog. But see the jest, how contrarily it fell out as he was calling out, mons, pons, simul and sons, and such like, a cat (unexpected) leaped from the gutter window, which sight so amazed Tarlton, that he skipped there, and threw his hostess down, so that he departed with his fellows, and left her out of sight, being then in the surgeon's hands, and not daring to tell how it came.
Tarlton riding with divers citizens and his friends to make merry at Waltham, by the way he met with his oastess riding toward London, whom he of old acquaintance saluted. She demands whither they went. Tarlton told her, to make merry at Waltham. Sir (she says) then let me request your company at my house at the Christopher, and (for old familiarity) spend your money there. Not unless you go back (Tarlton says) we will go to the Hound. But she (loathe to lose their custom) sent to London by her man, and goes back with them, who by the way had much mirth, for she was an exceeding merry honest woman, yet would take anything: which Tarlton hearing, as wise as he was (thinking her of his mind) he was deceived: yet he asked her if the biggest bed in her house were able to hold two of their bigness (meaning himself and her). Yes (says she) and tumble up and down at pleasure. Yea, one upon another, says Tarlton? And under, too, says she. Well, to have their custom, she agreed to everything, like a subtle oastess. And it fell so out that Tarlton having her in a room at her house, asked her which of those two beds were big enough for them two? This, said she. Therefore go to bed sweetheart, I’ll come to thee. Mass (says Tarlton) were my boots off, I would indeed. I’ll help you, sir, (says she) if you please. Yea (thought Tarlton) is the wind in that door? come on then. And she very diligently begins to pull, till one boot was half off. Now (says she) this being hard to do, let me try my cunning on the other, and so get off both. But having both half off his legs, she left him alone in the shoemaker’s stocks, and got her to London, where Tarlton, was three hours, and had no help. But being eased of his pain, he made this rhyme for a theam, singing of it all the way to London: women are wanton, and hold it no sin, by tricks and devices to pull a man in.
On a Sunday, Tarlton rode to Ilford, where his father kept. And, dining with him at his sister's, there came in divers of the country to see him, amongst whom was one plain country plough jogger, who said he was of Tarlton’s kin, and so called him cousin. But Tarlton demanded of his father if it were so? but he knew no such matter. Whereupon, says Tarlton, whether he be of my kin or no, I will be cousin to him ere we part if all the drink in Ilford will do it. So upon this they caroused freely & the clown was then in his cue, so that (in brief) they were both in soundly. Night came and Tarlton would not let his cousin go, but they would lie together that night, meaning to drink at their departure next morning. Tarlton would by wit leave him in the lash, since power would not. But see the jest. That night the plain fellow so pissed Tarlton in his bed, thinking he had been against the church wall, that he was fain to cry for a fresh shirt to shift him. So when all was well, they must needs drink at parting, where indeed (to seal kindred soundly) the fellow had his load. For hearing that his cousin Tarlton, was gone to London, zounds he would follow, that he would, none could hold him. And meaning to go towards London, his aim was so good, that he went towards Rumford to sell his dogs.
Tarlton meeting with a wily country wench, who gave him quip for quip: Sweetheart (said he) would my flesh were in thine. So would I, sir (says she) I would your nose were in my I know where. Tarlton angered at this, said no more but goes forward.
One asked Tarlton why Monday was called Sunday’s fellow? Because he is a saucy fellow (says Tarlton) to compare with that holy day. But it may be Monday thinks himself Sunday's fellow, because it follows Sunday, and is next after. But he comes a day after the fair for that. Nay (says the fellow) but if two Sundays fall together, Sunday then may be the first and it would show well, too. Yes (says Tarlton) but if thy nose stood under thy mouth, it would show better and be more for thy profit. How for my profit said the fellow? Marry (said Tarlton) never to be cold in winter, being so near every dog’s tail. The fellow seeing a foolish question had a foolish answer, laid his legs on his neck and got him gone.
Tarlton coming into a market town, bought oats for his horse, and desired enough for money. The man said, you shall, sir, and gave him two half pecks for one. Tarlton thought his horse should that night fare largely, and comes to him with this rhyme: Jack Nag, he brag, and lusty brave it, I have enough for money, and thou shalt have it. But when Jack Nag smelled to them, they were so musty that he would none (God thank you, master) which Tarlton seeing, runs into the market, and would slash and cut. But till the next market day the fellow was not to be found, and before then Tarlton must be gone.
Tarlton in his travel had a dog of fine qualities, among the rest he would carry six pence on the end of his tongue, of which he would brag often, and say, never was the like. Yes, says a lady, mine is more strange, for he will bear a French crown in his mouth: no, says Tarlton, I think not; lend me a French crown, says the lady, and you shall see. Truly, madam, I have it not, but if your dog will carry a cracked English crown, here it is. But the lady perceived not the jest, but was delirious to see the dog’s trick of six pence. Tarlton threw down a teaster, and said: bring sirra: and by fortune the dog took up a counter, and let the money lie. A gentlewoman by, seeing that, asked him how long he would hold it? An hour, says Tarlton. That is pretty, said the gentlewoman; let's see that. Meantime she took up the six pence, and willed him to let them see the money again. When he did see it, it was a counter, and he made this rhyme alas, alas, how came all this to pass? The world's worse than it was, for silver turns to brass. Aye, says the lady and the dog hath made his master an ass. But Tarlton would never trust to his dog's tricks more.
In the city of Norwich, Tarlton was on a time invited to a hunting, where there was a goodly gentlewoman that, bravely mounted on a black horse rode exceedingly well, to the wonder of all the beholders, and neither hedge nor ditch stood in her way, but Pegasus her horse (for so may we term him for swiftness) flew over all, and she sat him as well. When everyone returned home, some at supper commended his hound, others his hawk, and she above all, her horse. And, said she, I love no living creature so well (at this instant) as my gallant horse. Yes, lady, a man better, says Tarlton. Indeed no, said she, not now. For since my last husband died, I hate them most, unless you can give me medicines to make me love them. Tarlton made this jest instantly: why, a horse mingeth way, madam, a man mingeth amber, a horse is for your way, madam, but a man for your chamber. God a mercy, Tarlton, said the men. Which the gentlewoman noting, seeing they took exceptions at her words, to make all well, answered thus: that a horse is my chief opinion now, I deny not, and when a man doth me more good in my chamber, I him defy not. But till then give me leave to love something: then something will please you, said Tarlton, I am glad of that, therefore I pray God send you a good thing, or none at all.
Gentlewoman, said Tarlton, and the rest as you sit, I can tell you strange things. Now many gallants at supper noted one woman, who being little and pretty, to unfit her prettiness, had a great wide mouth, which she,  seeming to hide, would pinch in her speeches, and speak small, but was desirous to hear news. Tarlton told at his coming from London to Norwich, a proclamation was made that every man would have two wives. Now Jesus, quod she, is it possible? Aye, gentlewoman, and otherwise able too, for contrarily women have a large preeminence, for every woman must have three husbands. Now Jesus, said the gentlewoman, and with wonder shows the full  wideness of her mouth, which all the table smiled at, which she perceiving, would answer no more. Now mistress, said Tarlton, your mouth is less than ever it was, for now it is able to say nothing. Thou art a cogging knave, said she. Mass, and that is something yet, said Tarlton, your mouth shall be as wide as ever it was, for that jest.
There was a great huge man, three yards in the waist, at Saint Edmondsbury in Suffolk, that died but of late days (one Master Blague by name) amd a good kind justice too, careful for the poor. This justice met with Tarlton in Norwich. Tarlton, said he, give me thy hand. But you sir, being richer, may give me a greater gift, give me your body, and embracing him, could not half compass him. Being merry in talk, said the justice: Tarlton, tell me one thing, what is the difference betwixt a flea and a louse? Marry, sir, said Tarlton, as much and like difference, as twixt you and me. I like a flea (see else) can skip nimbly. But you, like a fat louse, creep slowly, and you can go no faster, though butchers are over you, ready to knock you on the head. Thou art a knave, quoth the justice. Aye sir, I knew that ere I came hither, else I had not been here now, for ever one knave (making a stop) seeks out another. The justice understanding him, laughed heartily.            
Tarlton going in the dark groping out his way hears the tread of someone to meet him. Who goes there, says he: a man, or a monster? said the maid: a monster. Said Tarlton: a candle ho. And seeing who it was, indeed said he, a monster. I'll be sworn for thy teeth are longer than thy beard, O sir, said the maid, speak no more than you see, for women go invisible nowadays.
Tarlton and his fellows, being in the Bishop of Worcester's cellar, and being largely laid to, Tarlton had his route, and going through the streets, a dog (in the middle of the street, asleep, on a dunghill) seeing Tarlton reel on him, on the sudden barked. Now, now dog, says Tarlton, are you in your humors? And many days after it was a byword to a man being drunk, that he was in his humors.