
Monday February 3, 1862. 
We thought we were to start today _ but it dragged through without any thing more than the simple inquiry whether we were ready. It began to rain during the forenoon, & kept up almost all the day. I was officer of the day, and altogether it has been an impatient day. Nothing at all happened except that a small boat came in, said to have had on board 19 contrabands, who escaped from above Roanoke — 5 women & a baby.

Tuesday February 4
This Morning early it drizzled, but then  cleared cold cloudy. This afternoon sun came out, very windy, and [sitck] behind a bank of clouds.
apt Renaut promised a clear day for tomorrow. [Landsnun] prophecie a storm. It is said that the little boat had three rebel spies. They came near in the fog, the fog suddenly cleared away and they hadn’t time to get off : that another boat had the contrabands. There was [Auff] dog, and it sat heavy on my stomach. The inconvenience of so many of us being here together is exemplified in many ways. One can regard the illness of a [news] of a small family with charity — but when there are thirty or forty, of varied and not all ways pleasant habits, some sick with different diseases, the consumption spreading around, those subject to sick headache puking around — pigs overloading their stomachs, and making themselves disagreeable — oh, for our canvas home and quiet gentlemanly mess. A day passes very quick. Breakfast a nine — a few hours reading brings dinner at four — we then go on deck to watch the sunset, or take a constitutional. The evenings seem the longest however. It seems a long while until nine o’clock . Morris came on board this evening with sailing orders — to got at 7 o’clock in the morning — but its terms and effect I did not learn further.
 Morris had been used to talking to Neill, who has caught cold and is very deaf, and he bellowed at us as if we were deaf.

Wednesday Feb 5
It was bright and clear this morning and cold, continued so all day. The first brigade got under way about eight o’clock, and the second Brigade about nine o’clock. The Northerner first, with three schooners in tow, George Peabody with two schooners, and next the Cossack, with the Scout in tow. We watched with interest the Commodore lead out past the point followed by the gun boats, and when it headed Northward we felt assured our destination was Roanoke Island. It was a beautiful sight to see the fleet steaming slowly up the sound, the waters sparkling in the brilliant sunshine. The air cold and clear. So they continued all day long, making scarcely more than three miles an hour. We dined at four o’clock and went on deck, as usual to watch the sunset. Stumpy point was in eight. A low range of trees marked the marshy shore to the left, and over it down back of us, the splendid arch that crowned the sun as he sank down, was as fine as any I ever saw. The red had not yet left the sky, before we came opposite Stumpy point. The American flag run up the foremast of the Patuxeut, our anchor dropped, and we left the deck. Not before we saw the gunboats range themselves as usual out beyond us, our bulwark and safety. The Scout came floating up along side, our comrades of that ilk were gathered on the sides and shrouds, as we were gathered on the side next them, and a lively conversation ensued, Scout. “Bring back those hams you stole” Cossack. “Where are the hospital towels. Scout. You can sleep on the hurricane deck if you come over here.” Cossack. Where’s the quartermaster’s whiskey.” "Scout we can accommodate you in the dirty gangways, as you did us.” "Cossack you weren’t fit to sleep any place else.” & so it went on with banter and test. The allusions were to the fact that when the Scouters came on board here the other day and during their stay forty five dollars worth of ham, belonging to the officer of the Scouters was stolen as also beef tongue &c. And our hospital stores were broken open and fifteen towels taken, and a barrel of whiskey belonging to Uncle Sam. Tapped. Money was also stolen. We were unable to tell whose crew did it but in a bantering way each accused the other of it: Each alledging that there was no thieving in either vessel until they all got together on board the Cossack. Frank [Rizetdly], artist for the Lon Illust news, a correspondent of Lon Times, and Frank Leslie's artist are on board the Spaulding. I heard of Frank [Rizetdly] being at Centreville but did not see him. I should like to ee him, because I commenced taking the Lon Illust News first at the beginning of the Italian war & he illustrated that and afterwards the Sicilians war.

Along the shore of Stumpy point I observed three houses; The Pilot told me they were  fisheries-houses built on piles- for the negroes in the Spring during the fishing season.  There are fine shad fisheries here. The shore is marshy inland for many miles. Impassable and they build up a place in piles for a windlass, turned  by horse power to draw in the nets. It was a beautiful moonlit night. I was up  on deck taking a quiet smoke by myself. There were the same stars I used to see  at home, the great Bear, the Pleides, Orion with his star lit belt and sword -  I wondered what they were doing at home. 
            

Thursday Feb 6
We moved farther up the Sound-very slowly- stopped about ten o'clock, and  anchored about eleven.It began to rain became misty, and rained until evening,  and then cleared off about six o'clock. When the anchor was let go, the  boatswain gave a long whistle, and called down the hatchway "All hands  splice the main brace" I watched & wondered what that meant, but was  soon edified on seeing the grog served out all around. The other evening a  boatswain came on board and now everything is done by the whistle.The  whole batch of reporters left this evening.They evidently got the idea that their  advantages were not so great here for obtaining information. They were as jealous of each other as tom-cats, and every day or two raised a row with the Captain because  he, or they supposed he showed favour to one more than the other, & then they would  have a convention-so that one wouldn't take advantage of the other. They were mad because they supposed the officers were corresponding for his dirty little country newspapers.  Alcot, Ripley and Prawe asked the Capt. for a boat to go to  the Spaulding- then all wanted to go. Capt. said but 3 could go at  one time. When Alcot got over he sends a noteback to the Col. that it was  with difficulty they were allowed to stay, and that they would have no  sleeping accomodations. This was evidently to deter the Herald & Inquirer. But as the Col. was not in interested, he did not impart the information  and they all departed. Burnside will curse the day they were allowed to come along, and the sooner they are sent off the better. We Pennsylvanians needn't expect anything from them-Even Alcot, best disposed toward us,  seemed sort of mad because our Regiment was assigned the left of the Brigade. Roanoke Island is in sight of us- a little blue streak on the  horizon. We can see a lighthouse too. We can't tell what has been done today, further than that the troops of the Pioneer and Lancer have been put on other boats, and they, the boats, taken forward. They are gun boats and each have  four guns. 

Friday Feb 7 
This morning it was clearer but rather cold. The gun boats has moved up into  the Channel between Roanoke Island and the Tyrell shore. We kept moving up slowly  too- the fleet past a bend at the point of the island, and we could see them  across the point of the shore. This took all the morning and we were eager spectators of the scene, until about half past eleven the gun boats opened on  the batteries. Then commenced an awful cannonade. We watched the shells bursting in every direction, some high in mid air some low close to the ships,  and our shells striking in every direction about the battery. A black smoke enveloped the battery- and the flames burst out- their barracks were on  fire-twice they put them out and a third time they caught. We recognized  the different boats- we especially admired a little sloop with one gun, which  sailed like a duck up and down delivering her fire with emphasis.  The Cossack ran up within perhaps four miles & we had a beautiful and uninterrupted view of the magnificent scene. The Dinkie (the Union) black with her thousand men, and the Patuxent crowded ran out to the  right toward the shore of the Island about three o'clock.There the Pilot bow crossed our bow full, and drawing behind her about 30 surf boats filled with men. They stood over to our right. Just before this the Patuxent passed up with Reno on board- we cheered him. I got up on the hog-frame and waved my hat to Tom Grier, whom I saw on the hurricane deck .  When the boats had got off to the right they laid there - about five o'clock the signal for disembarking was given. The Scout had been lashed along  side of the Cossack during the afternoon.
Lt. Col Bellin attempting to cross from the Scout fell down between the boats. Fortunately the wheels were not  going, and he climbed up the paddles and came out the door of the wheel house.
                
Friday 7. 
Our boats had already been lowered. The two surf boats were to be towed (on fold) by the small ones. Then Capt Bennet & his little boy got into the small boat. The colorguard, I noticed Peter Kozier, color corporal from our company among them, got into the boats and as many of Co. B. Capt Bell, as could got on. board and put off. Co. A. Capt Bolton put off from the Scout. Soon Croatan Sound was full of little black specks moving toward the shore. I think there must have near five thousand men moved at once. There were a few houses standing on the shore, and we observed a company of rebels there but they ran as ours landed. We watched the first color planted on the shore and its black surrounding of men, then a second. It was now nearly dusk. The firing of the gunboats and battery had nearly ceased. One of the little black gunboats came near us - we observed his stern somewhat decomposed. On inquiring he said one of his steel guns burst and killed one man and wounded several others. We saw the Hunchback draw off with her and knocked out. The Delware [sic] covered the landing of the troops and the other gun boats formed in a line toward shore between the battery and the place of landing. We went below - coffee hot and smoking, warm bread and ham on the table, we thought to have a stomach full before we went. But the Deleware ran along side, and we were ordered off immediately - had hardly time to pour the scalding fluid down. It was now night - the moon struggling with fitful effort through the dark banks of clouds. The 8 companies were put on board and we left the Cossack. When the steamer was about a hund- red yards from shore, a boat at the stern disembarked part of Co H with myself and we made the shore. I formed them and sent Dave Brewer up ahead to pick out the way. It was very dark and the ground boggy, so that it shook under our feet Brewer had gone but a few yards when he suddenly disappeared, & I saw him bobbing up on the other side of a ditch "look out Captain here's a well" We passed it safely, and got abreast the bow of the boat where I waited and formed the whole company with a few missing who turned up afterwards however.
Then we had to travel through a swamp - a road had been formed of saplings but they were scattered and we often went in over boot top. We got on to terra firma pretty soon, and met Beaver, who was acting as an aid [sic] to the Col. who piloted us up to our place in the Regiment. We stacked arms, placed sentinels over the stacks, I cautioned the men about an alarm, that they should rise and take their places behind the stacks, and await orders to take arms. Then they dispersed to hunt wood & bedding, cornstalks, brush &c.
There was a house and some outbuildings and fences. These latter were soon demolished to make fire wood, & an apparently well fence clearing of about 8 acres was soon as open as any common. I got several split sticks & Shorkly & I lay down on them. He had a gum parachute & I a small gum blanket. Beaver had nothing but a blue overcoat, which we had all put on one of each before we started. We lay an hour or two. It began to rain. Beaver got off to the porch of a house and shivered under a canvass [sic] tent.

Saturday 8. 
It rained incessantly all night and there was no sleep. we sat by a miserable little fire all night. Some times I dozed and dreamed of being in the comfortable cabin of the Cossack, to wake with a start to find my self miserably cold and wet. So all passed the night. I don't know, but I think I suffered more than ever I did. Towards morning, perhaps between five and six, we all went over to the porch of the house, Shorkley, Beaver & I, and though it was crowded, I sat down & took a few winks of sleep. Afew [sic] shots were fired, & every body ran. We got back to our company and found them quietly standing behind their stacks, ready to take arms. We took arms, dressed, & stood sometime, the alarm passed, I formed the men according to their numbers, we could not do it last night, divided them into platoons & sections, and we stood in the drizzling rain. The different regiments formed, some had lapped with us in the darkness of the night. There were perhaps two thousand men there. Our regiment came out with over 800 men, My company 73. The irst Brigade started about seven o'clock. Reno, Burnside were about. Morris came across to us with a great big sword with a steel scabbard buckled on him. None of the officers had their horses. "You'll soon have orders to march are you ready". "Yes". we teased Morris about his big sword he could scarcely draw it & return it, it was so long. I saw Lt. Col Monteil cross the field to the house, the first time I had seen him since I sat as judge advocate

Saturday continued,
about up fast, seven we heard some shots and then a valley of musketry. Foster was driving in the pickets. Then bang went the artillery then  musketry and so it kept up. We moved up the head of our brigade had already entered the wood, and our reg still standing in the clear, when the first wounded man was  carried a long- then another and another- it was the most trying thing we had to endure. But  the officers were all cool and calm,and every command was given in a clear voice, & it seemed to keep the courage up. We passed up a narrow road through the wood, just wide as a wagon track, like our mountain roads, thickets of low pines and bushes. It was just like the roads up around Rengler’s' old mill- Then it was thick with wounded men carried and limping past us. Double quick - came to a mud puddle we were dainty at the first & got around it, which broke us up a little, but the next one we dashed through. An occasional shell and bullet whistled, but we could  see nothing but the regiment winding through the wood ahead- we {turned} off  through the wood at a double quick, and got into another road - the  battle we could hear, raged fiercely - every step we met wounded and dying and exhausted and some to whom we strongly suspected of being prematurely exhausted. An officer came and told me to send word to my col. to send a company of skirmishers out  to the right. I thought of aids & officers giving orders without authority, but still  determined to obey orders, and serve up Serjt { Erwine}with the order- The Col after- Wards told me that some company at the head, relieved him of that agreeing to deploy. We passed the hospital which was so near that several men carried the wounded There were killed. {ming?} goes a shell over our heads, and a piece struck a man  lying down to rest & killed him. We came to a halt -our regiment hall turned to  the left by order, but could not get through. My company was just at the point where we had turned from the road. I stood with the col on a log, at the fork of the  roads when a volley of musketry crossed over our heads accompanied with a shell. We got down rather suddenly. Here the bullets sung unpleasantly near. Orders came for us to leave so much of our regiment as had crossed the fork of the road And turn of the ? to the right up the road- There, thinks I, I am to lead the column. Everything was so uncertain, did not know where the enemy were, musketry Sounded all over -all around - it was wood and brush no body to be seen - we soon saw things however With more than the eye of faith. Co D, second company ahead of me was turned off leaving two companies and Lt. Col Bell in the thicket on the left Double quick up up we go - balls, shell flying somewhere - I saw Gen Reno at the corner of the wood - John Morris, then our brass field pieces, then  all our other regiments lying flat down then An opening two or three hundred yards broad, then the battery of the enemy, the belching fire and smoke the Hail{?} of rattle of halls all around and above us- {wanging?} into the trees- here we come into a swamp up to our knees in mud &deeper - a poor fellow all doubled up beside a felled pine tree, we tramp on over him- we were in front of the enemies battery, in full view, crossing to gain their right - the swamp was tangled to that the requirement halted and we lay down right in  front of the battery . The triumph was just hive swamp - i've been in both and this was worse. Up again to run the gauntlet. We lay there some ten or twenty minutes flat on the ground. We gained the right and went plunging  through the swamp up to our waists. Beaver was standing on a stump collecting the different companies - i never saw more than a half dozen of my company. I was standing on a stump looking ahead, when I saw Shorkley about ten yards ahead plunging through calling{co.H} it bewildered me to see him  there , I wondered how the rear of my company could have got there. Billy Allison Brewer, Serj Campbell & Charles Merill were with me generally and others who appeared and disappeared I rushed ahead and found that shorkley had but two or three with him . He had cut across and got a head of our colors - we still  dispute how it happened, he alleging that I followed the Rhode Island colors. That couldn't be as the The Rhode Islanders T were still further to our right. However Beaver appeared on a stump and he was calling to co. H away to the right to come over to the capt - We were certainly ahead of our colors, for they came up afterwards, part of our company having followed it.Here we halted and got collected. The Rhode Islanders on our right parallel . Here we heard a cheer the back companies of our Regt were still in front of the battery, we all took it up and cheered when they told us our colors were planted on the enemy battery. 

Just before it however, we saw a man on a tree making signals. one from our regiment stepped out without orders. the man disappeared. Charles Merrill was with me through and he kept on talking in his usual quiet way. He said he had been in  pine swamp, but this was worse. He had been hardly able to do any service since he has been here, but he was one of the most quiet cheerful soldiers I ever saw & he walked along waded rather, with his musket on his shoulder canteen and haversack just as if he were in the court room walking round the bar. We pushed on - the Rhode Island and ours got mixed. we came out on the right and the front of the battery

Here we had to wade a pond up to our middle - but there was the battery. The right wing of our regt drawn up were marching on. We had to halt to form and it was near an hour before it put out and formed. By this time all the troops had left, and our battalion was ordered to remain at first to draw the guns, & then to stay in the battery. I chafed at this- However while forming I left the company to go to the battery. Here I met Mr Mallory & he shook hands congratulating our safe delivery. I remember saluting him just as we left our bivouac ground in the morning as we marched fast to go to the wood, and his face said "he might not see us again in life." We lost but two or three. I went on to the road on the left of the battery- just at the corner lay a dead man- and on the right just by the gun of the embrasured handsome dark skinned man, black whiskers and mustache & hair I noticed his delicate hands and small feet- he lay on his back his eye staring wide open, handsome even in his miserable surroundings- half imbedded in mud- hands blackened with powder- no uniform- had a pea jacket, and fine underclothes- with "Seldon" written on his undershirt and waistband of his drawers I learned afterward he was Lt. Seldon, son of Dr Seldon of Norfolk- that Col. Shaw cautioned him against exposing himself- "Damn them they can't hit me" he scarcely said it when he fell pierced through below the eye. At the centre gun lay a mule still in harness probably to draw off the gun- looked, very much, like as if it had its throat cut - but Col Jordan of the Rebels said it was killed by a minie- ball. Farther over lay a muscular man, with large red whiskers - a ball had struck him in the back of the head and his brain had oozed out into his hat until it was full. there were five or six dead men lay in the fort. A wall tent was pitched on the left. Two  wounded rebel officers were laying there. Lt. Col. Patter who entered the fort from the left said that when a few of our men approached one of the them he cut at them with his sword, and on his asking him why, he did so, he said he had heard that we were ordered to give no quarter. If officers believed that, what should their men believe. We afterwards learned that they thought do, i had been told to by their officers. The most disagreeable thing was to see that the dead had been all robbed- pockets turned inside out- buttons cut off for relics. i was attracted to look at Seldom again, & found his name had been cut out in both places. I walked around through the swamp & dead bodies were lying scattered around through it. We had dragged one of the cannon some distance, when Burnside ordered them back, and the balance of our regiment were ordered to stay in the fort. owing to the constant wet weather and exposure with no coffee or cooking utensils, all we had to eat was in our haversacks, Reno had ordered up whiskey. The officer in charge passed us, and wished Shaw to send a party in charge of a commissioned officer to bring some back to our men, as he would not deal it out until he reached head quarters Lt. Foster & I were sent with ten men & we followed up the grog for a couple of miles when we met Beaver


Saturday 8th 
who was on with the advance, and had been sent back to order up the rest. I told him that we had been ordered to remain. He started back with us. We came to a crossroad, which he said was the road they want, but the officer in charge was perverse & went straight on - we followed him &Beaver left us. Up to the right was a house where Capt C. Jennings Wise lay mortally  wounded with five wounds. A gentleman had picked up his gum blanket at the battle field & I saw his name on it. The road was strewed with knapsacks, and other things thrown away. I met Gen. Foster on horseback - “Well” says he “boys we have gained a great victory- they have just surrendered to me two or three thousand, and the island is ours.” We threw up our caps and yelled. We came to field - An old man and young man Islanders half drunk were explaining to us how they had been loyal men all the time. Then we travelled on - every one we met told us it was a couple of miles - We were dreadfully tired . We let the grog gang go, anxious to get some quarters as it was growing  dark . Lost our road several times - at last after dark arrived in what seemed a little town, but was the enemy’s barracks. I stumbled into Col Upton, Mass 25th and asked permission to sleep on the floor. I pulled off my boots. There was an inch of water in them & we had travelled 7 or 8 miles since we left the battle ground, & I was rather sore. It was a grateful thing to lie on the cabin floor. Col Russel of the 10th Conn was killed in the battle from concussion it is supposed of a passing cannon ball as there was no mark on him. One near him said he put doubled himself together and fell dead. We passed him on our way to the battle field. One of his men carrying him, crying called to us to give it to them, they had killed his Col. Capt Henry was killed too. He talked awhile complaining of pain in his stomach, but there was nothing, but a blue streak across his stomach. Lt. Col Monteil was also killed, he unnecessarily exposed himself, firing with his rifle in front of the battle, Frank Leslie’s artist was in close, behind a stump. 

Sunday 9th   
I woke up this morning feeling as if I had been made for an old man eighty years old. My boots were scarcely dry, but fortunately the Chaplain of the 21st had found a can of lard and by a dint of greasing, and halling I got them on. I found outside quite a little town. Cabins nicely built in streets for the men & log houses for the officers in the order of a regular camp. I saw a great many of the rebel prisoners - among them the Richmond Light infantry blues,Capt Wise’scompany, which had so handsomely, entertained the New York 7thThey were fine aristocrat looking fellows in grey uniform like the Lewisburg greys. I found I was but two of three hundred yards from Reno’s quartersthrough the wood. It was a handsomer set of barracks than the others - the houses built of boards - the chimnies outside of mud and sticks plastered with mud. I found Beaver in the Col’s quarters & the Col told me I need not go back as he had ordered the other companies to come up. During the forenoon I went down to see the forts - there were three - one of eleven one of four, the other of ten - this last one was the one that was bombarded but it had not been materially  injured at all. They had spiked the guns, cut the ropes, threw most of the ammunition into the swamp. They are beautiful works built of sod and sand - and heavily armed with thirty two pounders some rifled - they are very formidable, & well manners could not well be taken. 


Wednesday 12
Dear John I'll send this much to you as I have an opportunity to send it by Capt Snyder. I have been working hard all day getting up provisions. You will have heard of the grand naval victory. I’ll try and finish this as soon as possible - & give as full an account of it if possible. Please presence this carefully. I dont think I can write to the Chronicle- you can copy from this. 

Sunday 9th 
The batteries, numbering three, are very nicely constructed of sod and sand. The fort just below here on the beach was called, [?]? Reno, eleven guns next Blanchard, now Park,  four guns mounted and a place for a fifth, lying on the shore at the landing- the third on Pig point, Bartow, now Fort Foster. This latter was not injured any of account. There were two red guns- one or two disabled. The barracks inside were burned and a great many arms destroyed. Houses out side were perforated with shot & shell and we saw many lying far back of it. A great deal of powder had been thrown into the swamp, and are in case number of arms have been fished out of the swamps. On our way back, we met a party who had taken two prisoners. One a bright eyed fellow said he was from Craven, County & that his company had worked the guns themselves. The fourth shot had disabled the gun, and one man killed & three wounded was all the casualties. Hassenplug found an old classmate of his when at Union College,Pilot by name, from [?] of a company. He knew John Blair Linn. They had long conversations of old times. He, told us a great deal, which we did not altogether. I suppose they placed the same reliance on a great many of our statements. He said the army at Norfolk was 15.000 that was on the Island on Saturday during the battle, and was so hard pressed that he left his overcoat. We heard the explosion of the fortification on Nags head on Saturday evening, but took it for an evening gun from a nine inch shell gun. Beaver picked up a tract “for the times” published at Petersburg Va. He has also one he took out of the cap of one that was shot in the last skirmish just before the the surrender near this camp. Casting our burden on the Lord by Joseph Atkinson. “There is no class of men who excite a deeper interest in every loyal son of the south than our gallant soldiers & who have exposed them selves in defense of our honor our liberties & our lives The Col sent for the rest of our battalion & our company arrived in the evening. They passed a most miserably wretched night, and said they felt very anxious about me.  The barracks put up here will probably accommodate four regiments. There is every thing indicating an eye to comfort convenience and a permanent stay.

Monday 10  
It commenced snowing, and on the whole was a very disagreeable day. This after noon or evening I started to go on board the Cossack, I went with Lt Blair, Brown & Conolly seamen, & a half dozen others. It rained and grew dark, on us before our  weary tramp of five or six miles through the sand ended at the Pig point battery. As the cook pointed out where our boat lay, visions of hot coffee and warm biscuit rose before me-decent coffee we had not since we left the  Cossack-& that was nothing like Dick can make.  Our vexation can be imagined faintly when we found in the boat gone- we were five miles from our camp and it would take two hours to make it- it was snowing We made various attempts to get over- we started to get quarters. Our clothes were wet we had no blankets- We found a little house whose whole front had been knocked out with a shell- built a fire with about a half cord of wood at a time and got just inside the house. Oh, but it was  miserable It was the longest night I had yet spent, of all the miserable nights I had spent since I left the Cossack. About eleven o’clock we were roused with the news brought there, to the headquarters, we were not aware they were in a shanty close by that the gunboats had run past the fortification at Elizabeth City, [?] against the gunboats boarded them set fire to & burned five the Jamy among the number, captured one, then turned their attention the fort, landed, spiked at the guns, blew up the fortifications. The rebels set fire to the City, blew up the locks. The mayor of the City came off and surrendered to Capt Rowan, and requested him to assist in putting out the fire. Rowan said that he could not consent to land & if they saw fit to fire the City he could not help it- that he could not lie under the imputation of having fired it.

Tuesday 11
After spending a most miserable night I succeeded in getting on the Cossack it looked very lonely and desolate, and I could not even sleep. I returned after dinner with the baggage of our company- Capt Snyder of company G resigned on account of ill health. His lungs are seriously affected. Lt Henry, Capt Picot & Dr Worthington rebel officers took dinner with the Col. [?] is of the regular rebel army fights with a will. Speaking of the Pilot that brought us up, [Bony?] somebody- he said so earnestly Well if he can reconcile it with his conscience I’m satisfied. Worthington was the exaggerated southerner with long hair and very light mustach.

Wednesday 12
This was a delicious warm day. I was detailed to bring up the days provisions from the shore, about a mile. We had no transportation. Everything had to be carried Barrels rolled-we laid a board path for nearly a mile over by land. In the delicious air of the forenoon Jim Gibson George & I sat on a pile of rocks by the shore & watched rebel officers march on board the Pilot boy to be taken to the Spaulding, 

Wednesday 12 cont.
our friends Worthington Picot & Kenney among the number. There were many fine gentlemanly looking men, of all sort shaped [hats?]. It is said that the officers of the Virginia Regt, when they started to come here, they for a fake had their baggage marked New York - intimating they were going to fight their way through - they go there in an unexpected way. A flag of truce came over from Nag's head and took the bodies of Capts Wise & Cole. Gen Burnsides quarters were crowded with Islanders taking the oath of allegiance. We got in to quarters along by our Company, accepting Capt Picots wounded, and I suppose George's and mine were taken among them. If that is so I am well enough satisfied.
            
Friday 14.
Another delightful day. Our Regiment was on guard yesterday and we were up last night. I got a tub last night took a bath one of the Islanders had washed some clothes for us - and now I feel a new man. Beaver and I went over to see the site of Ft Raleigh. The remains of a mound, but grown over with trees fifty or a hundred years old, are to be seen. it is in an overgrown thicket. Jim a darky piloted us to it - He was ship launcher - that is helped to get off ships that were beached - He said the rebels told him that we would put him in chains and take him to Cuba and sell him. We passed the house of old Doe - two rebels in uniform were brought up to see the old man before he died. for a hospital, & the prisoners were turned out, & had to lay out all night. It was a pity, but we were as bad for we have our men crowded in two small rooms. Yesterday one of the barracks in which the rebel prisoners were, was taken This evening an order came that each captain should take five prisoners into their quarters. It was an utter impossibility with me. Beaver & I talked with them last night a good deal. They are very ignorant - & are something like our rivermen without their smartness. We got our mail last night. Rec’d three letters from  John & one from Annie. Our boys were sitting around reading newspapers  & the rebels stared at them. They look agape at us drilling. This afternoon Lt Col Bell took the regiment out along the beach. Saw an ancient mill, where there were still remains of corn lately ground. This with being on guard duty last night makes me undisposed to write.
            
Saturday 15.
It was rainy, drizzling all day. About ten o’clock we had regimental drill and marched down along the beach & visited all the batteries. At the lower one they were digging trenches, making bridges, drains &, and putting up a telegraph up this way. We returned up the road about three o’clock hungry enough to eat a good dinner. Dick had ready for us of roast potatoes, fried beef, coffee and butter & crackers. Yesterday up at Does they showed us some fig trees - they resembled in appearance horse chestnut, not in leaf. Our cooks were ordered on board to cook three days provisions and have them ready by tomorrow evening. We understand that we are to go on some expedition and return here - our camp equipage is to come on shore. 

Sunday 16th.
Rained, fizzled, and was generally unpleasant. We had company inspection and regimental, and service. Rodumel has quartered with us, & we live as comfortably as ever. Dick makes excellent tea and coffee, biscuit, and we have had butter and canned tomatoes this several days. Tomorrow, we we hear, we are to go on board the Cossack to go on some expedition, and are to return here. The New York 51st remains on the island. An arrangement has been made to exchange prisoners, and an oath has been to day administered to them not to [send?] against the U.S. until duly exchanged. Morris told me they had a communication with Gen [?] stating that the Bull Run prisoners would be exchanged first & then others as far as they go. One of the Louisianan’s formerly of New Jersey, told us that a wounded rebel was waited on by his brother in our army at one of the houses on the Island. As they passed up here, they found the North Carolinians here, who told them they should go up & fight, and after the defeat, they came back this way & found them cooking. They told them there was a devil of an army coming after them - they got so scared they ran around in a ring. An old negro gave a comical description - he said they ran down to the shore, some of them stripped off their clothes, and they were all bedassled.
            
Monday 17th
It rained furiously all morning. But quit toward noon. We were put in charge of the prisoners in our camp somewhere near five hundred, and ordered to get ready to go on board the Cossack as guard. About noon, the regiment formed to escort them down, but the Adjt had neglected to give us orders, and in the stress of time we had to get ready. Beaver was left to bring down the baggage - he got an old go-cart, but we marched off without him. We were all put on board the Dinkie, and taken to the Cossack - where we stowed them in the hold and between decks - Many were sick and very miserable - we put them in the ladies saloon - Little Connolly that spent the snowy night with us is down with the smallpox. I was talking to some of the prisoners - one of them asked me with a seriousness that made me laugh, whether our government had not sold many of the slaves taken from their masters & that escaped to the Spaniards - that they had been so informed - also they had been told that on our march up to Manassas that we had burned pillaged and destroyed - raped women - that many men had to stand by and see their wives and daughters raped before their eyes. They asked me whether they would not be allowed to go home before they would have to go into service again, and said they would like to get out of it. We feel that we are in rather disagreeable service, with the number of dirty filthy, sick men with all sorts of diseases, mumps, fever, chicken pox & - but have said that we are to do our duty, and leave the consequences in the hands in whom all things are. We took possession of one of the bridal chambers. Mr Mallory, Charles Mallory & Capt Snyder are on board, & we form a mess. Beaver & party got on board, in a surf boat with all our baggage last night which puts us in good trim. I little thought when I sailed on the Cossack that I would ever have charge of her.
            
Tuesday 18th
Our men were busy cleaning their arms and we put up racks amid ships. The Capt & Capt Snyder went ashore. Kelly came back with him - having absent two days without leave I put him under arrest. Two surgeons, rebels were sent on board to attend to the sick. Of all miserable dirty squalid looking men, these prisoners are the worst - We turned them out on deck and counted them numbering 484. This evening we cleaned out the ladies cabin and made a hospital of it. Pleurisy & mumps appear to be most prevalent. This evening the Dinky came along side with 50 or 60 wounded prisoners There was a rebel doctor, a very gentlemanly fellow, with them and he protested against putting them on board. I felt disinclined as we had enough to do. So the capt of the Dinky, Chambers, concluded not to put them on. The day was cold. A fleet with soldiers came up the channel - some said the D'Epineuil Zouves were along. I never wish to be put in charge of a prisonership. Though some are very intelligent the majority are helpless as they are ignorant. They all tell us that we have treated them very kindly. War is horrible. I first saw the pomp & circumstance - the battle field - the dead and wounded now the prison ship. I felt relieved when they took away the wounded - we had no bed pans - and they would have to evacuate as they lay - I could imagine what it would be by morning, from what I have already seen. I understand we are to go to Elizabeth City. My hope & wish is to get there soon. Tom Grier came on board to see us this evening. He looks very well.
            
Wednesday 19th
Clear. I went with Mr Carpenter, the mate down to the Picket, to inquire for the mail, but found she had been only to Hatteras, & brought none. Then we went to Gen Burnsides Head quarters on shore to inquire for coal - then up to Ft Reno to see our Quarter master about provisions & went up to camp to see our sick - they were in our old quarters but they had with chicken pox - two others we have in the hospital. When we came down to  the beach a party had a little bull, like a two year old, but which a grey headed darky declared had been on the Island 6 years, & he was old then, hitched in a high cart, filled with boxes and barrels. He walked off with his mountain load with considerable care. We sent Bobst to shore, sick with the chicken pox. Shorkley & the Captain went over to Croatoan island to the fortification that the rebels blew up, on the day of the surrender. It was made by putting in two canal boats end to end, and filling up outside with sod. A man said they had about a thousand darkies. He said also that they had drafted on in three on the Island & this was the day they were to come after them. We got some sweet potatoes and a bottle of milk. The sick are getting worse. The rebels had run a gun boat through which we had put some holes into the shore at Croatan Island, and there it sank. Our gun boats took away all the cannon burned the boats, and took up the engine & boiler of the gun boat which were in good condition.
                 
Thursday 20.
This was a delightful day - like ours of May. I went ashore with Captain Bennet. The prisoners were getting sick by the dozens, and the surgeons said they would die in  piles if we remained long. It smells dreadfully down there, & the filth & dirt is indescribable. Although we have plenty of flour, there is no means of baking - our hard bread was done, & from the trouble in getting food served as it was, I was afraid of a row, if the want of bread was added to the trouble. So we went up to Reno's quarters, and I gave him the history - He said we would start this afternoon which was good news - so when we got to the beach we saw the flag at half mast, blue, & knew it to be recall of all hands to the ship. I had fortified myself however with an order to remove all my sick to the Peabody. We got to the Cossack in time for dinner, twelve o'clock anchor hewed immediately and we ran up to where the other vessels were anchored, just above the head of the Island, and along side the Peabody. I communicated my orders, but just then Gens Burnside & Reno came up in Alice Price, and orders were given to sail, so we concluded to leave them on board. The day was bright and we went it gaily, the little tug Champion leading the way, next the Spaulding, Peabody, Admiral, Cassock, New York. The Spaulding was the officers and the Peabody the wounded and sick. About four o'clock we entered Pasquotonk river. The shores were marshy and lined with dark pines, with here and there an acre or two cleared, and a windmill. At one place six windmills were congregated and ten were in sight, so we neared Elizabeth City. There were plantations and some fine looking houses. The most beautiful sight were successive [?] or steppes of dark green pines, of different heights, thick and dark - as if they had been cleared and grown at different pines. The water was dark colored like tan bark, the shores winding, bluffed with groves of the tall yellow pine. We rounded a point and came in sight of the place, a shire, tall brick buildings, like mills, apparently just placed on shore among the tall pines. On the point was their fortification tenantless, & gunless, its magazine blown up, and near the shore wrecks of gun boats, one a propeller perhaps the Jamy, and one a side wheeler. The shore appeared close in here. The sunset was very beautiful - and the scene was sombre enough - those pines give it a dark severe look - perhaps in the summer it is brighter - but the most pleasant sensation was to see something of civilization again - a town however small. As we came near, & I saw the houses & farms on shore - Large fine looking houses, some with balconies all around - in the calm evening much like our summer, I thought more of home, and how I would live & alter things in our old house, than I have done since I left home. I was talking to one of the Surgeons - he said though he had been very enthusiastic for southern rights, he thought if he got off he wouldnt get in the army again.
            
Friday 21
It was bright & fine this morning. The Spaulding & Peabody were taken up first to unload - The New York and then the Cossack. There is twelve feet of water at the wharf and several fine brick warehouses, market houses and other fine buildings.  We could see up one of the streets, which was narrow lined and arched with trees, & in the summer time must be very pretty. The different companies were called off, one at a time, and names called & checked. We met some of the officers Capt Picot Col Jordan & others. Their tone was changed, since they got on their sail out of reach of us - false fawning, in order to get well treated, apparently grateful - The 3rd Georgia Reg't was on duty & I understood from one of their Lts, that they were on duty along the canal, & some bitter con- versation between them and our men ensued, until I ordered mine on board. The officers lie to their men without doubt. Capt. Picot said to his men as soon as he saw them "Boys I have good news for you - we have licked them on the Cumberland and taken 5000 prisoners. That 3rd Georgia Regt needs a dressing bad. We all parted with bitterer feelings - the much more so that the ungrateful dogs gave us such an ill return for all the trouble & exertion we made to make them comfortable. In the forenoon while waiting for our turn I went with the Capt. on shore on to the ruins of the Propeller Jamy. & where they had the battery - four guns lay there, but their carriages burned & their effectiveness destroyed. About four under sail and steam ran down the sound, & anchored at Roanoke Island about seven o'clock. It was piercing cold this evening. The officers on the Spaulding growled at their fare but the Capt told them that they got better than they deserved.

Friday 21.
In the ruined battery were buried two men Fred. [Herman?], seaman & Thos O'Mara Co A. Rhode Island Vols, who fell Feb. 10, 1862 for his beloved country, as it was inscribed on their head boards. The 3rd Georgian Reg. wore our blue overcoats, and they have been captured in the Jamy. 

Saturday 22. 
This morning after a splendid sleep - relieved from all anxiety, whilst raining very hard, I went off to shore and up to camp, where I was informed we were to come over: owing to having no quarters I got permission of Gen. Reno to stay on board until Monday morning. We got back in time for dinner. The Capt. was going over to Burnside's quarters, & as there was something said about fumigation, I concluded to go too. We took poor little Cuffy over to the Hospital to die perhaps - I heard the Capt brutally remark that he brought him over to the hospital because he hadn't pine enough to make a coffin for him. When I got there I heard Dr Church send an order to Gen Reno to have the 51st Regiment P.V. separated from the others. He told me to get my company off the Cossack as soon as I could. I sent word over to Shorkley to have them ready, and took the back road up to camp. I met the Col. & told him what I had heard, I went to camp, then to the beach, found the Brigade commissary got a little boat, rowed 5 or 10 miles, got to the Cossack just as the Company left in the surf-boats - I went back to get quarters as the quartermaster hadn't got our tents off as promised - I could not find any at Camp & got an order from Gen Reno to use the tents at Fort Park. So down we trudged all the way - & found the tents had no poles. However New Jersey boys turned in and pulled the tents over the cook house made coffee for us & treated us splendidly. Capt Chesney treated me like a prince & gave me a bed in his tent.
                
Sunday 23.
The Jersey-boys gave us our coffee this morning, & we came down and took poss. of a house & have been busy fixing up quarters. This evening after a dull cloudy day we had a glorious sunset - I have not seen many finer things than the look down over the Sound this evening.
                
Monday 24.
It was very windy here today. The sound was lashed into fury and beat with a roar on the beach. Dr Cutter & Dr Hoosack were here today. It appears that the cases we have had were [variolaid?]. We had one in the Cossack and four now in the hospital.  One man is broken out. We appear to have been the only company in which it was any ways prevalent, and we have been ordered to stay here until it is eradicated.
                
Tuesday 25.
We sent Smith up to the hospital with the small pox. no other cases have developed. The day was very pleasant and we drilled steadily. Dick has a very bad cold and we are fearful that he is another case. There are others apparently having bad colds and pains in the back - Confound it, I expect it will prevent us from being along with the next expedition. In other respects it has blest us with good quarters. We went up to the [?] and got a couple of boxes & then to the [?] where we saw Tom Grier. 

Wednesday 26.
It was pleasant this forenoon. We drilled all day. About noon we were put in possession of Ft Park. I did not remove from my present quarters in Meekin's house, but detailed a guard of 14 to the fort. This evening rain set in & it is dreary enough. We have another case of small pox probably - at least the symptoms of pain in the head and back like  a bad cold, are very much like the other cases. Well we are in for it & a good time will have of it I expect. When danger is near it hasn't near the ugly appearance it has when afar off. I feel as easy about it as if I were at home. The only annoying thing is that it will prevent our going with the expedition. I have really spent a delightful time since I have been here, & the prospect of a rainy day, which perforce eased one from exertion is really delightful in contemplation.
            
Thursday 27.
Last night it stormed fearfully. It howled around our old barracks. This morning however it was clear and bright & cool. I went up to the Barracks - the first thing I saw was them carry several drunk Irishmen across to the guard house & the next thing the Sutler tent with three guards, & and not allowed to sell anything. They had searched the tent & found some sherry Brandy. We bought flour at the Brigade Commissary for 3 cts per pd - surgar 10 cts & candles 25 - We can pay anything at what the government pays. We returned in time for company drill. The boys drill admirably & if we only have a week or two more we will get along. This afternoon we drilled as skirmishers. The sunset was remarkably beautiful. Our house fronts on the shore about a hundred paces from it. The sound is about five miles wide & the further shore gives a deep blue [air?] - Tonight it was saffron and scarlet before last gold and orange & blue. At dusk Beaver & I strolled up to the Fort. The boys had a fire in the old cook house & were sitting around its cheery blaze talking. These camp fires will long live in our memories to be talked about when we go home. I bid them good night & thought amid all discomforts, war has many pleasant cheery phases.
            
Friday Feb. 28.
Contrary to our expectation from the terrible storm last night it was a bright and beautiful day. Beaver & I started with our walking across the Island, & came to a little house, where a woman & two children sat by the fire. Everything was neat & clean and the floor nicely sanded. Can you do some washing. No I ain't able to wash for myself. She said she was a widow - that there were few women on this island that clean had died in two weeks: they just took a pain in the head and the eyes swelled, and they died in two or three days. We trudged back remarking that if we could have got our washing done we would not have thought the way half as long. We went on up to camp - bought some butter at the sutler's for 45 cts per pd, & rice of the commissary 6 1/2. We returned, whose orders in our absence came to be ready to be mustered for pay. It was late in the afternoon when Lt Reno came, & this evening we had a game of ball - It has blown up quite cold.
            
Saturday March 1st 1862.
The morning was cold and clear - ice and a bleak wind blowing at all angles. Lt Shorkley and I intended to be off early, on a trip to the battle ground, but everything went wrong. As the wind was so variable, and the wooden chimney after burning half up, was found not to work, we adopted the expedient of cutting two pipe holes one out each side & changing around the stove as the wind changed. We had the pipe out the north side, but as it smoked, Dick changed it to the south side - it smoked worse - so it was changed again to the north - then again to the east - and again to the north where it was found to do best, but miserable at best. This occupied an hour and were smoked and frozen nearly to death - once Shorkley broke the elbow - We have the Stove on a box of sand, and it is pretty hard to move around. Dick in his efforts overset a pan of slop water over the floor & began to swear - Beaver scolded - "Well between the smoking stove and oversetting that its enough to make any man swear." At last the stove took a slight notion to burn and the shad was frying briskly - I sat reading behind the stove - then was an exception - two pieces of fish flew out on the stove and floor - spattered me with hot fat & my book all over. There never in all our house keeping such extraordinary trouble nor were we all ever in such a bad humor. At last we got breakfast about nine o'clock. Shorkley got started - went down past Park pt fort, along the beach about two miles, when a [major?] met us: we followed some one's truck and bound he had been fooled just as we were - we followed his track clear around the swamp back to the beach & then tramped back to Gen Burnside's head quarters, crossed the camp of the 8th Conn & took down a crooked road, reached the main road, and after a walk of three or four miles the old battery - Ft Russel We observed the trees marked with bullets more than 3/4 of a mile back of it, and near it every tree was scarred and cut. The battery was built in half moon shape, with three embrasures very wide outside so as to give as wide a sweep as possible to the cannon. An embrasure, where the 24 pdr Dahlgren was, swept the road - right in the centre. It was all cleared in front - & the road runs straight down about 1/4 of a mile and then bends to the right - & the wood is cleared so as that the road straight in front as also that of the bend. But right in front of the battery just where we crossed showed the most marks of bullets: two trees about 15-20 feet up were pierced through with cannon balls. The pine tree where we lay down was full of bullet holes. We then went down the familiar road, past where the field hospitals were, filled with groaning mangled men when we passed there last to the landing. The owner had come back - named Hayman, and it was at his landing instead of Ashby's where we landed. He said he was there until near sunset - that they did not expect us to land there but at Ashby's: that when he took is family across there the road was full of troops - Between the road leading to Ashby's & this place there is a deep creek, and probably the rebels were afraid of losing their artillery, or they would have attacked us there. This battery is but a half mile across & it could have been shelled by our gun boats had we known it. We walked down to where we landed and saw our broad swaths across the reedy shore - then went over to Ashby's We saw the young man there - he said he had been drafted - had gone up the canal bridge - & his lot fell on him & they were to go home and stay until called. From this landing where they expected us to land, there is a road leading through a swamp [?] - when the rebels were posted with two of their pieces that night they thought the water too low to land at Haymans. The Ashbys raised a white flag - & the rebel officers threatened to take them up. We saw the graves of our dead, one com. off Lieut Goodwin, & one first Serjt Jeremiah? W Morse - [?] - 23rd Mass 27 in all - 1 unknown 2 prob N.Y. 51 1 57th Penna. We returned the same way: met Alcott - had supper flour cake.
            
Sunday March 2. 1862.
It rained and drizzled all day. The adjt came in this morning and told us to have three copies of our pay rolls made out again one o'clock. So we set to work & it took us all forenoon. John Morris was here to dinner, He told us we were to sail in a day or two - that the Generals had agreed to disobey instructions & not go to Newbern, We were to go some place where we would be landed, and have a march of 60 miles to be done in two days & strike a blow that had ten chances to one of success - that any general would take one in three. He also brought us the news that Nashville Memphis and Savannah had been occupied by our troops: that Gen [Wool?] was in Norfolk with his staff by invitation from rebel authorities - supposed that they wished to surrender to him so as to take the chances as prisoners of war - What this means I can not conceive. I occupied the afternoon writing to the Chronicle. So I suppose we will have to hustle out of this in a hurry tomorrow or next day. We had another abominable job with our stove this morning, trying it out the various holes, and not succeeding in getting our breakfast until nine oclock.
            
Monday 3. 
This morning bright and clear again. We had another trouble with our stove and had to clean out the pipe. We have come to the conclusion that stoves were not made for this part of the country. One day seeming this pitch pine wood clogs up the pipe with soot and tar. Wide mouthed chimnies are the only comforts, and in them we will not dare to build the fires too high or we will set fire to the chimney. But if they are behind in many things, in building chimnies they have succeeded admirably. We noticed this particularly in the wooden ones put up in the wooden barracks, built by the Georgians. Beaver and I had started up to camp, when we were met with the Col. with orders to pack up and get up to the upper fort as quick as possible. We had nothing for transportation except a small hand cart. We hauled everything to the narrow path this  side of Ft. Park, making a half dozen trips - carried them over to the fort, then carried dragged, and pulled all up along the beach, through the deep sand, up to the landing. It was a terrible job. It worried us very much. There we met the rest of the Regiment, & our baggage put on a boat to be taken to the schooner, which was to take it to the Cossack. But the Schooner went off without it and the boat had no oars. The Dinkey came & we piled the whole Regiment on it - our boat, which fortunately was in the same boat with the Surgeon's, which gave it a better chance was poled down & put on the Dinkey. We got safely landed on the the Cossack about four o'clock. We had scarce been on here an hour when Mr Walton came on  with a large mail for us. I received letters from John of the 19th & 21st. In the latter he mentions the receipt of mine of the 11th, and the grand jubilee over the victory of Ft Donnelson. He enclosed a copy of the Times' correspondence describing the battle. It is grossly inaccurate, and as if written by one who had not been on the battlefield, but had picked up his intelligence from different mouths. Morris told me that Smith, the Times correspondent, was down there the other day with the Gens & some of the Staff, when the conversation ran on the coolness of some artist sketching Gen Foster in the midst of the fire. Smith said he was standing right by him. Frank Reno said you lie, you weren't there - no one was near him."  Smith was in to our quarters the other day, and he got some yarns from me that made him gulp. We all now have separate messes on board the Cossack. We have been told that we are going to Winton and from there to Weldon. We have taken none but our well men along - being ordered to have none but those who can stand a march of 60 miles in two days. New rifles, Enfield, are on board for eight companies of our Regiment.
                       
Tuesday 4.
The day was bright and clear. The sunset was very beautiful. The rifles were distributed among our men. We sent Jim. Kelly off to shore, broken out with the small pox. Surgeon  Hassack got drunk yesterday and has been laying in bed, sick, all day. Many of our men and officers are suffering for want of medicine. It is an outrageous shame that such should be the case, as no doubt after the hardship undergone and the close quarters we had many would necessarily become sick. The Col. said he had seen as much of it as he would. Hassack would come down nearly everyday to our quarters to see our sick. He would forget all about them, what he prescribed and what their ailments were, and it was as much as we could do to get him to go and look at them. Several days he wasn't fit to do anything and some days would not come down at all. Then I've been told that Dr. Noble has got to drinking too, and was at least once very much intoxicated.
            
Wednesday 5.
The day was pleasant, the water rough, however. This afternoon we had a threatened storm that didn't amount to much but it was magnificent to behold. The sunset was very fine too. In the open space between a bank of clouds that rested on the shore and those that covered the sun there was the richest tracery in scarlet and vermillion, and above in the dark mess of clouds one open spot golden hued.
            
Tuesday March 11th 1862 continued.
The day passed without incident. I spent most of the day reading Lossing’s pictorial field book, so far as it related to North Carolina. One cannot help thinking that if they show the same spirit as they did in the days of the revolution it will be a difficult matter to conquer. But their cause is not just as it was then - North Carolina is not in heart as it was then. The men are as brave no doubt: but their enemy is not three thousand miles away. There is not [Chatham?] in the Federal Congress, or any portion of the people in the North that espouse their cause. Their social institution is false at bottom. Capt Picot remarked to us that there would not be such an universal resistance if it were not for the women In the Mecklenburg District in the days of the revolution the young ladies formed an association agreeing not to receive the attentions of any young man who did not join the army in defense of their country’s rights, country man who would not fight for his country, would not be fit to be a protector of them. Perhaps the feeling arises from the stories of rapes & robberies told of our army - perhaps because it is said we would arm their slave against them. They know well that their husbands and brothers make concubines of their slaves - that the slave if freed might wreak their vengeance on them. If I were a Southern women my fears, if I honestly believed this of the northern design, would drive me to a desperation. A tug boat came along side telling us she has a mail for us - The last we had was about the 21st & 22nd of February. 17 days ago. That was the last newspaper news we received. This will [bring?] a little later. We appear more anxious to receive this than any other - perhaps in prospect of a battle near - and it will be the last time many of us will hear from home.

Wednesday March 12.
This was a delightful day, and nothing could be pleasanter than our journey from Hateras to New berne. We [?] anchor at nine o’clock and steamed down the Sound, past Ocracoke inlet, Shell island Brant Island shoals, and felt some what anxious when we came to the place which indicated whether we went up the Pamlico or Neuse. The Pilot soon assured us that we were for New berne sure, but still it was disputed. About [?] o’clock we entered Neuse River and steamed slowly up, the Gunboats [nosing?] into every bank and bend until at 1/2 past seven we anchored, stuck some three miles from Newberne. An exciting chase after two little sail boats by the Picket, she firing a shot across the bow of each. We saw her come up with them in tow after dark. We observed all along the shores fired kindled raising dense smoke, apparently signal fires to warn of our approach. The sun set in glorious splendor over the quiet waters. Our band played the national airs on deck in the quiet moonlight. Morris came on board with orders. He gave us another report we don’t believe. That the Merrimac came out at Norfolk, sunk the Congress and Minnesota, played [?] with the Cumberland, but the Little [?] stuck to her and disabled her so that she had  to put back to Norfolk. Now will take a good nights rest and prepare for the battle tomorrow. I saw the adjt. write his resignation this evening. Ill health the cause - hemorrhage of the lungs. We feel that we will succeed tomorrow, but that it will be a hard fought battle. My hope is that Pennsylvania will not be disgraced. 

Sunday March 24th 1862.
This morning Tom Grier and Chas. Kline came down from New Berne in a boat. They were with two officers who went down to visit the battle ground. But as they didn't come back at 1/2 past twelve we took the boat and went to New Berne. It is about a mile and a half or 2 miles by water. We landed by the Alice Price, and went to a three strong ware-house, washed yellow, looked like Tom's house at home. The rebels had used it for an ordinance room "No smoking" was painted on the door "Yankee devils" inside. They did not suppose that we would see it. The room back used as an office was carpeted with cane, and nicely furnished - had a grate. Upstairs above, they had fitted up a nice room - carpet, bedsteads, mohair rocking chair, tables and chairs - fire place, with wood fire quite a library - which they had gathered from various houses in town. Even this gas fixture they had taken from some other house. This table had a fine tea set & everything a house keeper wanted furnished from the same source. I spent the afternoon & evening with them and it was too luxurious. I walked with Yerkes to the Cemetery. There is a wall and arched gateway around it, built of a singular sort of shelly conglomeration - would be very handsome if finished. But it all bears the air of neglect. Founded many years ago 1801 I think, by Christ Church transferred to the City of New Berne 1834 - it had many old graves in it - We noticed that of the Gaston - Wm & Margaret. They had a singular way of putting a figure 1 before their figures, so that one tombstone which  told of us of a sea Capt. that died on his passage from London to New Berne, in a certain lattitude and longi- tude, was aged 134 years. Another was 156. - We begn to think they had made voyages enough and it were time he would cease going to down to the sea, when we discovered that it must be either a _fashion_ they had or the oldest people lived here since the days of the flood. We were pointed  to a vault, which bore the marks of being pried open, from which it was said Gen Burnside recovered $45.000. One iron doored vault was open & the coffins lay there exposed in a way that seemed awful to me. 

Sunday March 24. Continued
We returned to the Gaston House & then went back to Tom's quarters. Tom & I started out to walk. Gen Burnside's Headquarters were in an elegant marble house, with a large well kept yard in front. The comical white guard tent pitched on the dark green grass, the two well dressed sentinels pacing up & down, the roses blooming in the yard, all made a striking picture. Near by was the lonly stacks of the chimnies of a whole half square burned down. Near by the Neuse river are several houses, and evidently stores burned. It looked odd to see a sign of "variety store" flaunting before a scene of desolation - It was curious to notice the vagaries that the fire caused in kegs of nails and other irons. The chimney stacks stood up, & one could not help picturing the bright cheerful parlors where those fire places and grates were, and beneath in the cellar lay the remains of the fire screen. We went up to the Car house & railroad depot. Cannon balls & shell lay all around & in the Passenger Depot were cartrige boxes belts, & accoutrements of all kinds, shell of a new kind with a new kind with a brass cork, canister - a tin-case like a tomato can, filled with 54 canister balls. They had evidently just dropped everything and run. From the letters we have picked up, they never dreamed of having to leave, & yet the Richmond papers say New Berne is of no account. It is to us if not to them, though they must have esteemed it of some impor- tance, from the amount of labour they have bestowed upon its defence. I concluded to stay all night and passed the evening cheerily by the bright fire place  

Monday 25.
I went to the Jamy - the Curlew runs over every 15 minutes, just where the Bridge was burned. I was one minute to late. Just then Lt Shorkley & Lt Gaulen came up in a boat & as they told me there was nothing to be done in camp & as my luxurious quarters last night gave me a cold, I concluded to stay. I acted as guide, took them to see what remained of Gov. Lyon's palace, the Cemetery, Car house. Then we went into a French Bootmakers. Gaulen talked to him in his own tongue. Met Morris, who took us around to Gen Reno's quarters, a white house nicely furnished. While here a Chaplain told us a romantic story of Dr Cutter's daughter, Brigade surgeon of 2nd Brigade who died this morning, here of what they call the Roanoke fever. She had requested to be taken to Roanoke Island and buried beside a young man by the name of Plummer, whose real name was Lidd, and was with John Brown in Virginia, and who had been attacked by some disease of the stomach the night before the battle of Roanoke and died the same night. We went from there & dined at the Gaston House. Corn bread, rice soup, roasted irish potatoes & rice pudding was all [?], at the first class hotel. And a morsel of wheat bread. 
Tuesday 25.
I was unwell from my cold all day. It was a bright fine day however. Morris was down to see us, but I was so unwell, I did not enjoy anything. We received a mail from home. Letter from John from the 14 - to the 20th March. We also got papers containing the accounts of the battle of New Berne. Some of them are very absurd. 

Wednesday 26.
I am still unwell with cold and passed part of  the day between blankets. It commenced raining about ten o'clock and it was very pleasant to hear it patter on the tent cover. The Adjt was to town and brought us the news that New Orleans was taken and that there was a big cannonading at Island No 10 & that our fleet had to withdraw from want of ammunition. We had to make new pay rolls today again. We expect pay pretty soon. Col. Hartranft, received news yesterday of the death of one of his children, and serious illness of others, received a furlough for 20 days & sailed in  the New York. We got some yeast powder & Dick baked us some elegant raised bread for supper. It was a really luxury to have it. Hassenplug & Etwine go home on furlough, or recruiting service after pay day. 

Thursday 27. 
Still suffering from my cold. Discovered the cause. I have been accustomed to wearing top boots & heavy sky blue pants. Very foolishly on Saturday after our return I put on cloth pants, and shoes, & have been wearing them since, though it has been considerably colder. Never thought of it, until this morning & have reverted to my top boots again. This afternoon Beaver & I took a stroll down to Ft Ellis [8 Dupre?]. This fort here is Ft Lane, five guns. The next below is fort Ellis of nine guns - built of sand shows a terrific explosion. The field all around is full of shell & canister, scattered all around - pieces of the magazine hinges of the door - broken arches lying all around. Below this is Dixie. Its construction is peculiar. A heavy frame of logs, floored, covered and sided with planks - two rooms thus made for two rifled guns. Outside frames of [withes?] are made about the size of barrels and filled with sand, connected by bundles of [withes?] 20-30 feet long. These are built all around and over them making them bomb proof. We could see that the [withes?] were tied with ropes taken from the sunken schooners - where they were cut off the sails. Below this are frames where they made these bundle. One  of these guns was dismounted and spiked. There was preparation for building another of a similar kind near it. They named that saucy thing very properly Dixie. The next one below of 13 guns is called Ft Thompson. We got back in time for dress parade. We pulled off some moss that grows on the trees here. It was the first thing I noticed when I landed at Slocum creek. It is of grayish color and looks like the beard of an old man tied fast to limb. It has that peculiarity that it don't creep along the limb, but hangs in a bunch as if tied to it. We had an elegant supper of fritters, bread, omelette, ham, fried potatoes &. We move our camp up near Gen Reno's head quarters tomorrow. We have now two cases of vanniloid in our company Hartz and Dougherty - Captain Taylor is down with it too. 

Friday 28. 
This was a bright fine day - a languid summer day. Part of the Regiment moved to our new camp nearer to town, but still on this side of the Trent, near to where we bivouaced the first night. I was officer of the day, though I was so hoarse that I could not speak above my breath. Toward evening I think my cold is broken up some. 

Saturday 29. 
We moved up to day. We had been promised teams, but they didn't come, so we tugged away at a hand-cart & we were nearly done, some one had raised a row over in town, and five 4 horse teams came in the afternoon, & before evening we had all our luggage up. We have a motley collection of tents, some of the 21st Mass, Sibley, Wall, common tents, great lumbering tents of the rebels. We managed to get two nice wall-tents & I pitched them at right angles - then we got part of a sibley & made a portico in front - it looks Swiss - One Dick has for his department. The other we eat & sleep in. We have it all floored very nicely, & tonight feel as if we were at home again. It seems like our canvas home at Annapolis. 

Sunday March 30. 1862. 
It was dark and gloomy and rained most of the time. Tom Grier came over and took dinner with us. Yerkes Kline & [Isedell?] were here too. Lt. Applegate, formerly 1st Srjt. of Co. M. 9th New Jersey was in to see us. The 2 lts of his [con?] had resigned, & the day before the battle he had appeared as 2nd Lt, in the Battle. Capt. McChesney was wounded & he has been in command ever since. Capt. McChesney was wounded early in the fight. As some of his men were  carrying him back he saw Capt Hayes of their Regiment a german company come retreating. He ordered him back. And as the Capt. didn't seem disposed to obey, he drew his revolver on him, and the Capt. got behind a tree. Then McChesney ordered the men that carried him to lay him down, and charge bayonets on them. They did so & the Capt. led his company back, & they behaved very galantly. 

Monday. 31. 
The morning was raw and chilly - such as we have in September. Then the sun came out about ten o'clock and was very hot until evening, when it became chilly. Whiskey has been ordered to be served to the men, an ounce in the morning I had determined to make application for a commission in the regular army, & got a recommendation from Lt. Col. Bell. I went over to Gen Reno. He and Gen Burnside both advised me to hold on to my rank here, as the army would be reorganized, and Captains would receive permissions to recruit companies: that I could not get a higher  rank than 2nd Lieut & would have to rise from it. Morris & I rode out about a half mile, where Capt. Williamson was building a fort. This is large to contain 8 acres, an enclosed fort, & is about a half mile from the Trent. Another is to be built 3/4 of a mile further toward the Neuse, & about a half mile from it. We had dress parade this evening & Lt. Shorkley acted as adjutant, Bible being sick. Since last night, everything has moved with an unusual 

Tuesday April 1. 1862. 
The day was hot, the sun making it so - but the air would at times feel chilly. I was quite unwell during the forenoon, weakened down by my cold and diarhaea. After dinner owing to some startling rumors I was induced to [Rolter?] over to New Berne. The town was as still as death, but the quiet work going on amazing. Artillery was being hauled out back of town: the 57th N.Y. & 11th Conn. sent to work on the fort. Our pickets had been attack last night one killed - one rebel killed & a deserter came in, who gave the information, that 5000 rebels were five miles this side of Kingston, and 25.000 in Kingston advancing this way, under command of Gen. Ransom, an old West Pointer, well known to our Generals, and said to be a man of considerable dash. 

April 1 continued. 
The Alice Price was sent to Hatteras last night at twelve o'clock to hasten the reinforcements. The Admiral came in while I was over there, & we saw the Cossack go up afterwards. I met Fitzpatrick, cor. of Herald, who gave me papers with the news of the Battle of Winchester. He said the 17. Mass. 103. N York, & 2 Maryland were there - & some batteries in all 3000. Parke's Brigade with the companies New Jersey are at F Macon, so that we have of our old force, 25. 23. 27. 24. Mass 10th 11th Conn, 51st N.Y. 57. Penna. 21 Mass, & 4 companies 9th New Jersey, 6 of the 48th Penna, about 6000 effective men, & the reinforcements 3000, 9000 in all. It is wonderful how reduced the regiments are by sickness and death. Our regiment for instance, had but 450 men on dress parade - & say 300 guard & other details makes us a little over 500 strong. I have nineteen sick in my own company. But prospects of a battle would call the sick out. It appeared to be a matter of anxiety to Gen Burnside that the troops were broken down so, and he attributed it partly to want of fresh beef & vegetables & he said that he had written to Washington urging beef to be sent. If the rebels wouldnt come for a week, they couldnt come past that fort. Col. Bell says his orders are that if he hears heavy  firing to form and march to the Ferry. Lt Bell that was with Capt. McRae in the battle with the Texans and New Mexico was his brother. 

April 2 Tuesday 
Bright and warm. We were ordered out somewhere about nine or ten o'clock to go down & receive the 2nd Maryland  & marched to the river, & lay there until near one o'clock, when Gen. Reno reviewed us, & told us to go back to camp. After dress-parade we got orders to move on to the other side of the river in the morning. We had [?] 4 regts 103 & 13 New York, 2nd Maryland & 17 Mass. We feel some regret that we leave our camp, now that we just got cleverly fixed. It is probable that the rebels have not more than 15.000 men at Kingston, & if they give us a few days they cant faze us. Chas. Merrill & Warner were promoted to the Corporals to day and Aaron Smith to the vacant Serjeantry. 

Wednesday 3. 
It was very warm to day. I was officer of the day. We struck tents about noon and having procured a large flat boat. The tents were first loaded on it & poled up the river. The Regiment then marched off with knapsacks. All the rest of the baggage was carried to the shore. Such a miscellaneous lot of stuff I never beheld, not in the most active of April 1st, The flat returned about eight o'clock in the evening, & we loaded all but the Hospital & Commisary stores. We got up to the landing somewhere about twelve o clock at night. The night was starlit, & it was a pleasant trip up, the wind and tide being in our favor. 

Thursday 4th 
Early this morning we unloaded the baggage, and got it on shore about a quarter of a mile from camp. The camp is at the west end of the town. The first Brigade being all here except the 21st Mass & 2nd Maryland, just in rear of the fort that is in process of erection. It is a large one covering near eight acres. The western Bastions are nearly completed Cannon are planted all along in the rear of it and in front of our camps. Gen Reno was here to see us this morning. The place is high & dry - but no doubt the sand will prove a nuissance. About here the land is well cultivated, but the fences go down like magic as each regiment comes in to encamp. Most of the day was spent in getting up our stores. It is pleasant to be here in a civilized place again. We received orders showing that the army is now divided into divisions two Brigades in our Regiment. We do not know how we are brigaded, but hope Col. Hastraupt will have command of one Brigade. The difficulty rests in the fact that the date of his muster is junior to any other Colonel. It is absence now, too, may operate against him. Shorkley and I took a stroll down town. It must be beautiful in the summer. Splendid trees over arching every street, the quaint old houses, giving one a feeling of satisfaction you do not experience, which seems a [word?], in fact, when you go into the handsome newly built northern towns. Peach trees are loaded with blossoms. Vegetation has com- menced, and the buds on the trees are bursting. 

Sunday April 6th 
Yesterday and the day before we did little else than fix up our camp. We had a short Regimental drill in the afternoon. Our men have forgotten some but the ground was very rough. In the afternoon we were blessed with the arrival of a very large mail from home. I received three letters from John & 2 from Annie & one from Laura. The last one is dated March 31st, so that it came through in five days. Both last evening this evening, Lt. Col. Bell and I took a stroll through the quiet old town. The streets are lined with  high arching trees, and the leaves are just budding. There are many fine houses, but the beauty of them is in the large grounds around them and the shrubbery. Roses are blooming, & the lilac & locust are out. The multiforce is crowded. It must be a charming place, and one could not help thinking of the pleasant social times they must have had in times past. There is wealth and leisure. Where Capt Ritchie has his quarters, was the office and rooms of a bachelor Lawyer, built in a cross shape, & the Col tells me has every luxury of library office, bed room, dining[?] bath &. It was said that at his parties, he always refused to drink wine, & kept up the impression that he was temperate. His servant, whom Capt Ritchie has with him, on the Capt's observing a number of bottles in a closet marked "hair tonic" that he would at times drink a bottle of it, 

April 6. continued. 
and lie for a day or two, perfectly besotted. He was in that condition when the attack was made on Newbern, & had to be carried away. We had company inspection in the forenoon. Tom. Grier came and took dinner with us. The day was delightful, & we went up to the platforms & one of the curtains is partially completed. I suppose that the alarms & fuss last week was caused by a Dr Thompson of the First Brigade, making a false alarm. Morris said he had bought about 70 bales of cotton of an old fellow out in the country, and after he had paid the money, some rebel cavalry came down and burnt it. An order was read on dress parade last night, sending the doctor to report at Washington with the recommendation to the Secretary of War to dismiss him from service - that soldiers lost enough rest & sleep not to be annoyed by false alarms and that all alarmists would be dealt summarily with. We formed under arms and marched into the Presbyterian church, where Mr Mallory preached. We heard also a part of the grand concert given by the 24th Mass Band, Gilmore's in front of Gen. Burnsides headquarters. After we got back we found all our men from Roanoke Island had got back except Murphy & Adam Henry, how have [?] fever. We look very red & some few will be marked. Poor Jim Kelly died on the 27th of March - he was delirious for 8 days and swore like a trooper until he died. It was owing to his impudence stripping stark naked - he was so selfruled they could not get him to take any care of himself. His side on which he lay was completely rotten - in fact he was one mass of corruption. I am glad the rest have gotten over it so happily. We have yet two cases on the other side of the River. We heard, through Gen Burnsides spies, who have just returned from Suffolk, that Gen. [Hendleman?] had taken Yorktown with 180 pieces of cannon. Our friends in the North appear to have been uneasy about us, for fear that we would get caught in a trap. Gen. Burnside has been kept thoroughly informed of everything that has taken place. His spies are everywhere, & he has a very finely organized system. Many are New York detectives. Six of them were on board the Cossack, & it was a long time before we knew who they were. They appeared and disappeared - where we never saw. One I remember did not come on board  for a long time, when the morning we left Hatteras to come here, he suddenly turned up. You would take him for a Jersey huckster rather than a detective. We were on board a week with them when we had  the prisoners. We kept the prisoners below except at certain hours, when the detectives would stay in their rooms. 

April 6 continued. 
It is wonderful that a change the appointment of Corporal has made on Charles Merrill. He is dressed very neatly and his hair and beard nicely trimmed, and appears to feel for the first time in his life that he has some responsibility. He does his work carefully and intelligently, & take a great interest in it. 

Monday 7. 
It was bright fine summer morning but commenced raining about twelve o'clock, & rained until evening. We had regimental roll call, & company drill. I spent most of the day in writing letters to John & Louisa & one to Jim Kelly's wife. This evening Beaver and I [shotted?] down town. It was very desolate. The [sandy evil?] drinks in the rain as fast as it falls. It looked odd to see the rain come pouring down, & sort of melt away like snow. 

Tuesday 8. 
The day was dark and murky in the morning but it cleared towards noon and was hot during the afternoon We had company & Regimental drill & dress parade. Rec'd a mail from home - two letters from John to the 2nd April. We had our pay rolls signed and will probably be paid tomorrow morning. 

Wednesday 9. 
It rained all night and most of the day, & tonight it has set in with rain again. Paymaster Maj. Sherman came here and paid off the Regiment in three hours. It was very surprising to see how large the companies turned out. I looked at Capt. Blairs company of ninety five men - I have not seen so large a company since I left Harrisburg. 

Sunday 13. 
On Thursday morning I went with Lt Morris on board the Vidette with 3 companies of the New York 51st to go up the Trent to Pollocksville. Everything seemed against the expedition. I felt badly, and as if I had no business to go along, though I had the Gen. & Lt Cols' permission. Took breakfast with Morris and went down to the river. The Ocean Wave took us to the Vidette - The New Yorkers were mysterious [?] they were on a serious expedition. I suppose their reporter was along - I know Mr Schell was along - & when we ran through the draw of the bridge and knocked one half of it down, he made a fine sketch of it. We had no surgeon - I went to Gen Reno - he sent me to Dr Cutter - he to the Surgeon of the 2nd Maryland, but as they were across the river, we concluded not to go after him, as we had a Dr from Pollockville on board, when Baron Eggleston of N.Y. 3rd had taken up, whilst visiting a patient, with another man named Baron a merchant up there, bound hand & foot & sent him down as a spy. We ran aground a mile up above the bridge & put them ashore to foot their way up. We lay all night then came down, got two tugs and pulled her off. So ended the Expedition. Saturday I was officer of the day. While standing out by the road, a horse came along with a coffin, followed by a buggy with a little boy. It was going out of town. Another buggy came in with two ladies, and when they saw the hearse, they set up the most piercing screams - they beckoned to me to aid them in getting a pass to follow the body out. They were the mother & aunt of the boy 16 years old, who had come to town & died suddenly of congestion of brain. I suppose he was a rebel soldier, but I did not press inquiry. Today I went with Tom Grier down over the battle ground. We took pleasure in having out the big pine trees. We found a ram-rod whose end had been bent by a bullet, and near it a bullet that fitted the indentation on the rod - evidently the same bullet that hit it. The trees showed wild shooting on both sides. The horses had been  buried in the trench & a very disagreeable odor prevailed. We heard the news that a battle had been fought at  Corinth and after two days hard fighting, the rebels defeated, Gen Albert Sidney Johnston killed, & Beauregard an arm taken off. The loss on both sides great. This battle I feared most of all. It is the last struggle for the Mississippi valley. 

Monday. 14. 
I have been exceedingly unwell - had to leave the drill this afternoon. I got some medicine, went out to dress parade & it had a bad effect on me. My head is giddy, bones ache, burning fever. but I hope I'll be better soon. We have the news of the Battle of Corinth confirmed. 

Tuesday 15. 
I have been under the weather and staid in my tent all day. This morning I felt pretty bright but towards evening the head-ache came again & this evening I consulted the Doctor again, who gave me a prescription with directions to take it tomorrow if I could sleep to night. My appetite is extraordinaly good. Gen Reno with 3 regts from here 21st Mass, 51st N.Y. & 48 Penn go to Roanoke tomorrow where they take on 3 regts & go some place else. Though the news of the defeat at Corinth is here, yet our Generals think this is the most critical point of the War. The senseless cry against McClellan is creating alarm, Burnside, Reno, Parke & Foster say that they will resign the day they hear that McClellan is removed. We had one man killed, Hoffman of Hassenplug's company and some wounded. He had his whole stomach knocked out with a [?] of shell. I struggled on foot - by foot. What most made me feel badly was that I should become exhuasted just at such a critical time. But many were like Officers & men. We at last came to a road: the regiment was sent in to the  left. I sat down & lay down - I thought would die. Alcott came along and put a flask of whisky to my lips and a few swallows revived me. We staid there, sending in all the stragglers. Col Bell sent for the 21st Mass & they came up in good order - They had stopped and rested. I had a large party of stragglers & started in with them the direction the rest had gone. I met Gen. Reno. He told me to keep down toward the left. He appeared to  be mad about something. I went to the road & then in. Lt Shorkley came out & lead the Mass 21 & lead them into position to the right of us. By the time I got into a big oak tree, I saw [?] [?] [w.k.?] streaming back, asked where his company was - said some were in there - I found there was no company [?] in battle - a serjt & corporal all that was known to exist & they with Blair. By this time my stragglers had fizzled out wonderfully - I had but two or three of my own men. I came on to my own men [lost?] there a few shots were fired, & some one cried out don't fire, they are our men. Capt Blair shouted to our color bearer to raise their colors high. We soon found out who they were - The infernalist shower of bullets came in on us that I ever witnessed. Two of my men fell, Lunig shot in the jaw, & Buskirk in the arm. But he gave them pepper back. The colors were a good mark to fire at & I ordered them lowered. The 9th N. York made a charge - came out in beautiful order - but the distance was great and they were exhausted - the rebels played into them with canister & ball - so the[?] over the [?] onto us. I thought the rebels were charging us, & gave my men orders to fix bayonets. I soon saw the red hats however. It did not make our men even quiver - They stood steadily firing. Directly we moved to the right, down along the fence - when the order was given to charge - down went the fence, over we went pell mell our flag ahead. Brouse of Hassenplug's company fell shot through the head. I had just reached a ditch, when I felt a sharp pain in my side & sickness deathly - fell and was unconscious for a little while - but recovered & staggered on, supported by some of my men. I am yet unable to say whether it was a faint or something struck me. I can't find any mark. The rebels left. But we were unable to pursue, being too much exhausted. We formed & I had the roll call, & found four men wounded - some missing - Laning, Buskirk McCormack, & Vandine. 

On Board Guide 
Thursday April 17. 1862 
Yesterday we got orders about noon to go on board the "Guide" with six days provision. In two hours we were on our march. Leaving all the sick we have seven hundred solid men with us. We marched through New Bern, past Gen Burnside's & Reno's headquarters - The streets of the town are  sandy like a sea-shore - the day was very hot - & though equipped for light marching it was very hard on us. We went to the wharf at the Railroad Depot, on the Neuse, & the Pilot-Boy took us One wing at a time, down to the Guide lying below Town. The Guide is a very fine boat 32 feet longer than the Cossack - & [?] fines. We are quartered very comfortable, though the men are very much crowded, and between decks it is very hot. Capt Shawl as usual drunk as a fool - I was reading at the table when he came up, took the light and made a drunken endeavour to light his pipe. My first im- pression was that the wind had blown it out. As I looked up he had his pipe upside down, swaying to & fro until he scorched his nose. "Don't you like it you can lump it" he said. I now register this now, that 'twere I have excused his impertince, because he was drunk, but here after, I will go upon the rule of law as to drunkeness, that is - every man is supposed to know the consequences of his own [?]. He commenced talking about getting killed - that we were to have a battle on this expedition. I shall never vary my belief in his innate cowardice. The only time he kept sober was when he led us away from Centreville. He was drunk when we landed at Roanoke, he was drunk at the battle. He was drunk at Slocum's creek & presented a most contemptible aspect - having fallen in the mud. The hair matress was too warm for me to sleep on, in the close state room, having slept in the open air for a month. Toward morning it became cooler & I slept. I have today been better than I have been for sometime. I have been bothered with pain in the back, head and back of the neck & stomach - I was not alarmed though they were symptoms of small-pox. But to-day my both hands broke out with red-spots & pimples. There we are thinks I - only regretting that I was not back to New Berne, and the length of time it would put me off duty. However after looking at it suspiciously all day, I found they turned out to be watering pimples - Bless my soul - was  ever man known to rejoice that he had caught the  Itch - [?] it was - & no small-pox - 

Thursday 17, continued, 
We left New Berne about six o’clock. We looked with interest, at Slocum’s creek- but I spent most of the day on the confessions of Love queen. We passed Ocracoke inlet about 11 o’clock, passed a steamer, Port Royal, and 7 schooners- Hatteras inlet somewhat after one, and got aground between 4 & 5 miles or so this side of Roanoke Island, just the place where the Guide got aground when we first went up. The Massasoit came down about dusk & took our men off to lighten the boat. The Cossack passed us taking the sick and wounded north. There is something singular about this expedition. The N.Y. 51, Mass. 21. 48, Penna were ordered to go on it. Lt. Col. Bell & some of our officers were sitting on the  Gen-Court , & Capt. Mitchel 51 N.Y. & other officers had just, got excused, to go on the expedition, & they were twittery Lt Col Bell Lt. Col. Bel on his noting left behind, when the order came countermanding the orders of other Regiments and our one substituted. The officers of the other Regiments are as mad as forty. An inspection of Monday return showed that our Regiment has as many effective men as the other three  together. Gen. Reno & Burnside are to join us. Co. E. Capt Hassenplug’s Company had to go without a commissioned officer. Forter is evidently consumpted & it will go hard with him if he gets home. He may attribute it all to his own work dissipation especially at Harrisburg. When our Regiment came on board, one of the the hands asked where we were from___said that we were the quietest men he ever saw____ It took but a half of hour before every man was quiet in his bunk__every other Regiment he said, in a half hour would have the ship upside down in a half hour. The Capt asked the Col. to make proper arrangements for order; The Col said he shouldn’t trouble about that____ “Thats what the Cols of other regiments said & we always had a row.” The Capt bail expresses himself agreeably surprised. He is a young man, highly educated, literary- mode sailor and though very young has been master for nine years. We are happily off now, but 

Friday 18th 
This was a bright fine day. We ran up toward the head of the Island and got aground. We were better off on the Ocean Wave. and with the assistance of the tug Champion, the Guide got through and anchored above the light house. The Northerner came up with the 21st Mass and anchored near us. About 3 o’clock the Picket, Massasoit, Ocean Wave and Pilot Boy came along with hooks. They were the 6th N.H.9 & 89 N.Y, 21 Mass. We were to wait until the Phil Came along She came with a flat and guns on, and about five o’clock got under way across the Sound. The wind blew strongly and it was very rough making some sea-sick. We understand that we are to land at Elizabeth City, march up to Grape Mills destroy the locks & come down the left Bank- root out some batteries. Its said our friends the 3rd Georgia & Lousiana Tigers are here- and that Gen Wise was seen in EC yesterday 

Friday 18 continued  
The weather was  warm but the wind makes it  cool this evening. Eight o'clock aground again. It would be very  mortifying if we were left behind- esspecially would the  jealous party  for whom we were substituted would twit us. I have been  unwell most of the day. But this evening I am  pretty well . If the march is 25 miles it will go tough with me.  

Saturday 19 
We lay after getting off until near three o'clock when the Picket came down after us, and they found the mouth of the Pasquotank and proceeded. The Light house had been burned down so that our pilot, not a good one at best, could not find it. About  five o'clock we reached the landing place, a sort of bend or  pocket just below Elizabeth City. The three regiments had reached  here about 2 o clock and had gone on. Our gun boats were  lying here in force. The light boats took us off and ran  as near shore as they could, then the small boats took  us as near as they could, and we waded the rest of  it. Very few but got in over the knees. After pulling off our boots and wringing our stockings we formed. We had been  divided into two brigades- first of 3 regts. 9th N.Y. 89. N.Y. & 6 N.H. and second Brigade 51st Penna & 21 Mass. About seven  o'clock we got under way. Two 4 horse wagons, with our  combustibles and two pieces of cannon under Col. Howard ahead. The 21 Mass in the rear. We marched on some two miles and reached  Curituck Court House. It was built of brick- there was a low  jail, & several houses around. We then marched on, through  a  beautiful county,  well cultivated, nice houses, and over  a  nice clay road, which it was a  pleasure to go over. After  going about five miles we came to a hand board which  said 8 miles to the river bridge, we turned into another road  and halted. Suddenly the Maj of 21st came along, and  the cry was to arms- we formed- but it was discovered that  the first brigade had lost their way and went about ten  miles around. We then proceeded, our brigade in advance.  From twelve o'clock until towards one, we were marching  very steadily, our men were dropping with fatigue, Morris rode along. I stopped & told him our men were dropping  out by scores - I was  most miserably exhausted . I could scarcely  move my legs. I had eaten nothing for two days, & had a raging  fever last night. We had observed a dense heavy smoke  ahead, across the road extending over a considerable area  of ground. We supposed it was a bridge burning. Morris had scarcely passed, when a cannon opened, and a six  pound ball struck in a ploughed field about two  hundred yards to our left, & rolled and bounded on past. Immediately a discharge of canister followed. We halted. Got  over into the field to our right and formed in line of battle.  The cannonade was kept up, the canister striking in front  and the round balls in front, and some went over our heads. We could see them quite plainly. But we could not  see where they came from on account of the smoke. In crossing  into the field, there was some confusion, and I ran after  straglers to get them into ranks. I had no assistance, as  Shorkley was adjutant & Beaver was aid to Lt Col Bell. We  moved on into the woods and turned to the left. Here I was so  completely exhausted that I begged Col Bell to give me Lt Beaver as I could not proceed. He told Beaver to take command,  and I should stay as his aid until I recovered. We moved  on through the woods. More than half of our men lay down  completely exhausted & worn out. The rebels kept our range  and the round ball & canister were crashing all around us. We had one man killed, Hoffman of Hassenplug’s company  and some wounded. He had his whole stomach knocked out with pice of shell. I struggled on foot by foot. What most made me feel badly was that I should become  exhausted just at such a critical time. But many were like officers & men. We as last at last came to a road: the regiment was sent in to the left. I sat down & lay down - I thought would die. Arnold  came along and put a flask of whiskey to my lips and a few swallows revived me. We stayed there. sending in all the stragglers. Col Bell Colonel sent for the 21st Mass - & they came up in good order - they had stopped and rested.  I had a large party of stragglers & started in with them  the direction the rest had gone. I met Gen Reno. He  told me to ride down toward the left. He appeared to  be mad about something. I went to the road & then in. Lt Shorkley lieutenant came out & I had the Mass  21 & to lead them into position to the right of us.  By the time I got into a big oak tree. I saw [milhe?] shine [?] streaking back, asked where his company  was- said some were in there - I found there was no company [?] in battle - a serif and corporal all that was known to exist they with [Blair?]. By this time my  stragglers had fizzled out wonderfully - I had but two  or three of my own men. I came on to my own men  just then a few shots were fired, & some one cried out  don’t fire, they are our men. So Capt Blair shouted to our color bearer to raise their colors high. We soon found  out who they were - the shower of bullets came in on us that I ever witnessed. Two of my men  fell, Lanig, that in the law & Buskirk in the arm. But  he gave them pepper back. The colors were a good mark  to fire at & I ordered them lowered. The 9th N. York made  a charge - come out in beautiful order - But the distance  was great and they were  exhausted - the rebels played  in to them with canister & ball - So they came over the  fence onto us. I thought the rebels were charging us, & gave my men orders to fix bayonets. I soon saw the red hats  however; It did not make our men quicker, - they  stood steadily firing. Directily we moved to the right, down  along the fence - when the order was given to charge - Down  went the fence, over went pell-mell our flag ahead. Brouse of Hassenplug’s company fell shot through the head.  I had just reached a [?], when I felt a sharp pain in my  side, &  sickness deathly - fell and was  unconscious for a  little while - but recovered & staggered on, supported by some of my men. I am yet unable to say whether it was  a faint or something struck me. I can’t find any mark  the rebels left. But once we were unable to pursue, being too  much  exhausted. We formed & I had the roll call, &  found four men,  wounded - some missing - Lanig, Bushkirk,  McCormick, & Vandine. 